༄༅།།བོད་ཀྱི་ནང་བསྟན་དཔེ་ཚོགས་ལྟེ་གནས།།
Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center
Text Scan Input Form - Title Page
Work:
W1KG1582
ImageGroup:
11KG1585
LCCN:
In/a
ISBN:
n/a
Title:
a study on the ratnagotravibhaga (uttaratantra)
ཏཀསཀི་ ཇིཀིདོ
Author:
takasaki, jikido
Descriptor:
n/a
Original Publication:
serie orientale roma;33
Place:
roma
Publisher:
istituto italiano per il medio ed estremo oriente
Date:
1966
Volume:
1
1
Total Volumes:
TBRC Pages:
2
In/a
Introductory Pages:
Text Pages:
n/a
Scanning Information:
Scanned at M/S Satluj Infotech Images, E-45, Sector 27 Noida, District Gautam Buddha
Nagar, U.P. 201301 via New Delhi, IN for the Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center, 150 17th
st., New York, NY 10011, U.S.A 2006. Comments: 2009



R O ME ORIENTAL SERIES
Already published:
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
1 1 1 1
VII.
VIII.
IX, 1.
IX, 2.
X.
Tucci G., The Tombs of the Tibetan Kings.
PETECH L., Northern India according to the Shui-ching-chu.
FRAUWALLNER E., On the date of the Buddhist Moster of the Law Vasu-
bandhu.
Rock J. F., The Na-khi Nāga cult and related ceremonies. Part I and II.
Conferenze, Vol. I. Containing lectures delivered at Is.M.E.O. by
G. Cædès, J. J. L. DUYVENDAK, C. HENTZE, P. H. POTT.
CONZE E., Abhisamayālankāra. Introduction and Translation from the
original text, with Sanskrit-Tibetan Indexes.
Conferenze, Vol. II. Containing lectures delivered at Is.M.E.O. by
H. CORBIN, N. EGAMI, M. ELIADE, J. FILLIOZAT, P. HUMBERTCLAUDE,
J. MASUI, E. H. DE TSCHARNER.
FRAUWALLNER E., The earliest Vinaya and the beginnings of Buddhist
literature.
Tucci G., Minor Buddhist Texts, Part I. Containing Asan ga's
commentary on the Vajracchedikā edited and translated; Analysis of the
commentary on it by Vas u bandhu; Mahāyānavimśikā of Nā gā
rjuna; Navasloki of Kambalap āda; Catuḥstavasamāsārtha of
Amrtāka ra; Hetutattvopadeśa of Jitāri; Tarkasopāna of Vi.
dy å karaśānti. With an appendix containing the Gilgit Text of
the Vajracchedikā, edited by N. P. CHAKRAVARTI.
Tucci G., Minor Buddhist Texts, Part II. First Bhāvanākrāma of Kama-
lasila.
Materials for the study of Nepalese History and Culture:
1. Tucci G., Preliminary Report on two Scientific Expeditions in Nepal.
2. GNOLI R., Nepalese Inscriptions in Gupta characters. Part I, Text and
Plates.
3. PETECH L., Mediaeval History of Nepal (c. 750–1480).
GNOLI R., The aesthetic experience according to Abhinavagupta (out of print).
ROCK J. F., The Amnye Ma-chhen range and adjacent regions. A mono-
graphic study.
CONZE E., Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā.
Le Symbolisme cosmique des Monuments religieux. Actes du Congrès qui
a eu lieu à Rome sous les auspices de l'Is.M.E.O., avec la collaboration
du Musée Guimet, Avril-Mai 1955. Conférences par R. BLOCH, J. DANIÉ-
LOU, M. ELIADE, M. GRIAULE, C. HENTZE, C. LEVI-STRAUSS, H. C. PUECA,
G. TUCCI.
WYLIE T. V., A place name index to George N. Roerich's translation of the
Blue Annals.
FERRARI A., mKʻyen brtse's Guide to the holy places of Central Tibet. Com-
pleted and edited by L. PETECH, with the collaboration of H. RICHARDSON.
Orientalia Romana. 1, Essays and Lectures, by E. BENZ, H. CORBIN,
A. GODARN, L. HAMBIS, V. MINORSKY, S. P. TOLSTOV.
ROERICH G., Le parler des Amdo. Étude d'un dialecte archaique du Tibet.
VAN GOLIK R. H., Chinese Pictorial Art as viewed by the Connoisseur.
Notes on the means and methods of traditional Chinese connoisseurship
based upon a study of the Art of mounting scrolls in China and Japan
(about 600 pp. Size 30 x 22 cm.). Limited to 950 copies.
MAHLER J. G., The Westerners among the Figurines of the T'ang Dynasty
of China.
XI.
XII.
XIII.
XIV.
XV.
XVI.
XVII.
XVIII.
XIX..
-
XX.
Please turn to the next cover



A STUDY ON THE RATNAGOTRAVIBHĀGA
(UTTARATANTRA)
Being a Treatise on the Tathāgatagarbha Theory
of Mahāyāna Buddhism



ISTITUTO ITALIANO
PER IL MEDIO ED ESTREMO ORIENTE
SERIE ORIENTALE ROMA
SOTTO LA DIREZIONE
DI
GIUSEPPE TUCCI
VOLUME XXXIII
LA REDAZIONE DELLA SERIE È CURATA
DAL PROF. ANTONIO GARGANO
ROMA
Is. M. E. O.
1966



SERIE ORIE N T A L E ROM A
XXXIII
JIKIDO TAKASAKI
A STUDY ON THE RATNAGOTRAVIBHĀGA
(UTTARATANTRA)
Being a Treatise on the Tathāgatagarbha Theory
of Mahāyāna Buddhism
Including: a critical Introduction, a Synopsis of
the text, a Translation from the original Sanskrit
text, in comparison with its Tibetan & Chinese
versions, critical Notes, Appendixes and Indexes.
Dar
ROMA
ISTITUTO ITALIANO PER IL MEDIO ED ESTREMO ORIENTE
1966



TUTTI I DIRITTI RISERVATI
Printed in Italy - Stampato in Italia



GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS
PACE
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
IX
PREFACE.
XI
•
1
INTRODUCTION
1
SYNOPSIS OF THE TEXT
63
TRANSLATION AND NOTES
135
APPENDIXES
I.
Supposed form of the Original śloka-grantha
393
.
II.
Corrections & Emendations to the Sanskrit Text
396
III.
Description of the Ultimate Reality by Means of the Six Categories .
400
INDEXES
1. Index of Sanskrit Terms
411
2. Index of Works, Authors & Schools .
437



LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
(for Synopsis and Notes on the Translation)
S
T
C
Sanskrit text of the Ratnagotravibhāga ed. by E. H. Johnston
Sanskrit term
Tibetan translation of the Ratnagotravibhāga (Sde-dge Edition, Tohoku,
No. 4025)
Tibetan term
Chinese translation of the Ratnagotravibhāga (Taisho Daizokyo Edition
No. 1611)
Chinese term
Sublime Science of the Great Vehicle to Salvation, by E. Obermiller (Acta
Orientalia, XI, ii, iii, & iv)
E. H. Johnston's Preface & Notes on the Ratnagotravibhāga
Kārikā
0
J
K.
V.
verse
Taisho Taisho Edition of the Chinese Tripitaka
Tohoku A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Canons, ed. by Tohoku Uni-
versity, Japan (1934).
BHS
Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit
BHS Dic.= Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Dictionary, ed. by F. Edgerton (1953)
M. W. M. Monier-William's Sanskrit-English Dictionary
PTS
Pāli Text Society's Edition of the Pāli Tipițaka
AA
AAA
AAN
AĀS
Abhidhs
Acinta
AkşP
AN
ASP
Abhisamayâlânkāra of Maitreya, ed. by G. Tucci (Gaekward's Oriental
Series No. 62)
Abhisamayâlaňkārâloka of Haribhadra, ed. by G. Tucci (ibid.)
Anūnatvâpūrņatvanirdesaparivarta (Taisho, XVI, No. 668)
* Anuttarâśrayasūtra (Taisho, XVI, No. 669)
Mahāyānâbhidharmasūtra
Tathāgataguņajñānâcintyavişayâvatāranirdeśa (Taisho, X, No. 302)
Akşayamatipariprcchā (Taisho, XIII, No. 397 (12))
Anguttara Nikāya (Pāli, PTS Edition)
Așțasāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā (Wogihara's Edition of the Abhisamayalan-
kārâloka)
Avatamsakaśūtra (Taisho, IX, No. 278)
Bodhisattvabhūmi, ed. by U. Wogihara
Buddhagotraśāstra (Taisho, XXXI, No. 1610)
Mahāyānadharmadhātvavićeşaśāstra (Taisho, XXXI, No. 1627)
Daśabhūmikasūtra, ed. by J. Rahder
Avats
BBh
BGS
DAS
DBS
[ IX]



J. TAKASAKI
DDV
DrdhᏢ
DRS
Gags
JĀA
KāśP
Lank
MK
MN
MPS
MSA
MSbh(P)
Mvyut
PP
RCS
RDS
RGV
Şads
SāgP
ŚMS
SN
SNS
SPS
TGS
YBh
Dharmadharmatāvibhāga (Skt. Fragment, ed. by S. Lévi; Tib. ed. by J. No-
zawa, Prof. Yamaguchi's commemoration Volume)
Drąhâdhyāśayaparivarta (Tibetan KG, Sde-dge Edition Tohoku No. 224)
Dhāraņiśvararājasūtra (Taisho, XIII, No. 397 (1–2))
Gaganagañjāsūtra (Taisho, XIII, No. 397 (8))
Jñānâlokâlankārasūtra (Taisho, XII, No. 357)
Kāśyapaparivarta (Ratnakūțasūtra) ed. by Staël-Holstein; (Taisho, XI,
No. 310 (23))
Lankāvatārasūtra, ed. by B. Nanjio
Madhyamakakārikā of Nāgārjuna (ed. by Poussin)
Majjhima Nikāya (Pāli, PTS Edition)
Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra (Mahāyāna) (Taisho, XII, No. 374)
Mahāyānasūtrâlaňkāra (ed. by Sylvain Lévi)
Mahāyānasamgraha-bhāșya, tr. by Paramārtha (Taisho, XXXI, No. 1595)
Mahāvyutpatti (Wogihara's Edition)
Prajñāpāramitā
Ratnacūdasūtra (Taisho, XIII, No. 397 (11))
Ratnadhārikāsūtra (Taisho, XIII, No. 397 (3))
Ratnagotravibhāga
* Şadāyātanasūtra (or Şaļindriyarāśisūtra)
Sāgaramatipariprcchā (Taisho, XIII, No. 397 (5))
Āryaśrīmālāsūtra (Taisho, XII, No. 353)
Samyutta Nikāya (Pāli, PTS Edition)
Sandhinirmocanasūtra (Tib. ed. by E. Lamotte)
Saddharmapuņdarikasūtra, ed. by E. Kern & B. Nanjio
Tathāgatagarbhasūtra (Taisho, XVI, No. 666)
Yogācārabhūmi (Skt. Part I, ed. by V. Bhattacharya; C. Taisho, XXX,
No. 1579)
Vajracchedikāsūtra, ed. by M. Müller (Taisho, VIII, No. 235)
Vimalakīrtinirdeśa (Taisho, XIV, No. 475)
Vijñaptimâtratā-trimśikā, ed. by S. Lévi
Source unknown
Vajc
VimN
VMT
unk.
(*) Sanskrit titles with the sign
are restored from the Chinese materials.
[x]



PREFACE
The present volume was originally prepared under the guidance of
Prof. V. V. Gokhale of the Fergusson College (presently of the University
of Delhi) during my stay at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute,
Poona, from August 1954 to January 1957, under the auspices of the
Indian Government, and was submitted to the University of Poona as a
doctoral dissertation. I wish to express my gratitude to Prof. V. V. Gok-
hale who instructed me in reading the Sanskrit and Tibetan versions of
the text throughout the two and half years of my stay in India and to Prof.
R.D. Karmarkar of the Bhandarkar Institute from whom I received much
guidance on Indian philosophy and the Sanskrit language in general.
When I was awarded the degree in September 1958, Prof. G. Tucci,
who was one of the examiners of my dissertation, kindly suggested that
I publish my work in the Serie Orientale Roma. I felt it a great honour,
but I could not immediately respond to this kind proposal, since I felt my
work inadequate and the presentation of it in English imperfect. Fortu-
nately, Dr. Alex Wayman of Berkeley, U.S.A., kindly made suggestions.
I also must acknowledge the helpful suggestions given to me by Dr. Way-
man, Prof. H. Nakamura of the University of Tokyo (my faculty adviser
in the Post-Graduate Course), Dr. H. Ui, and other Japanese scholars too
numerous to mention in the matter of doctrinal interpretation.
Dr. Ui, an eminent Japanese Indologist, published the « Höshoron
Kenkyū» (A study of the Ratnagotravibhāga) in 1959. It consists of
two parts. The first part consists of a critical and detailed studies on the
text, author, Chinese translator, doctrinal and canonical references, etc.,
while the second consists of a Japanese translation of the Sanskrit text.
I owe much to his interpretation in modifying my translation, although
points on which I disagreed with him are kept intact. It is indeed with
deep regret that I must note the passing away of Dr. Ui on July 14, 1963.
Ten years have passed since I started work on this volume. In the
meanwhile I wrote several articles related to the text. Some are involved
with the present work, but others, especially those written after sending
the manuscript to Rome for printing, are not touched upon in this volume.
Therefore, I would like to give a list of my articles so far published in order
[XI ]



J. TAKASAKI
to cover the shortcomings of the present volume. If the reader has further
interest on the subject, I hope that they will consult these articles.
1. «AMUKTAJÑA no Gogi ni tsuite» (in Jap.) (On the Meaning
of the Term amuktajña), JIBS, Vol. VI-1, Jan. 1958, pp. 186–190.
(Cf. Translation, p. 144, n. 23, etc.).
2. « Kugyõichijāhöshöron no Köző to Genkei » (in Jap.) (The Texual
Structure of the Ratnagotravibhāga and the Supposed Form of Its Ori-
ginal Text), The Journal of Religious Studies, No. 155, Mar. 1958, pp. 14-
33 (cf. Introduction, Chap. II and Appendix I).
3. «The Tathāgatôtpattisambhavanirdesa of the Avatamsaka and
the Ratnagotravibhāga -- with special Reference to the Term tathāgata-
gotrasambhava’ - », JIBS, Vol. VII-1, Dec. 1958, pp. 48–53. (cf. Intro-
duction, Chap. IV, § 3,4).
4. « Kegon-kyōgaku to Nyoraizo-shiso» (in Jap.) (The Hua-yen
Philosophy and the Tathāgatagarbha Theory Development of the
Idea of gotrasambhava in India -), « Kegon Shisā», compiled by
H. Nakamura and K. Kawada, Kyoto, 1960, pp. 275-332.
(a detailed investigation of the same subject as No. 3 mentioned
above).
5. « Tenne » (in Jap.) (Āśrayaparivítti and āśrayaparāvstti), Nihon
Bukkyōgakkai Nempā, No. 25, Mar. 1960, pp. 89–110. (cf. Introduction,
Chap. IV, § 7)
6. « Structure of the Anuttarâśrayasūtra (Wu-shang-i-ching) »,
JIBS, Vol. VIII-2, Mar. 1960, pp. 30–37. (cf. Introduction, Chap. V, § 7).
7. « Description of the Ultimate Reality by means of the Six Cate-
gories in Mahāyāna Buddhism », JIBS, Vol. IX-2, Mar. 1961, pp. 24–33.
(see Appendix III).
8. «A Comment on the Term Ārambaņa in the Ratnagotravibhāga,
I, 9», JIBS, Vol. X-2, Mar. 1962, pp. 26–33. (cf. Translation, Chap. III,
pp. 163, 168–171).
9. « Nyoraizo-setsu ni okeru Shin no Kõzõ » (in Jap.) (The Struc-
ture of Faith in the Tathāgatagarbha Theory), Komazawadaigaku-Ken-
kyūkiyo (Fac. of. Buddhism), Vol. 22, Mar. 1964, pp. 86-109.
(This is an article in which the structure and significance of a set
of three terms on faith, viz. astitva, guṇavattva, and śaktatva [cf.
Translation, p. 382, n. 20) in relation to sraddhā, adhimukti, chanda,
abhisampratyaya, prasāda, and abhilāșa are traced back to Abhi-
[ XII ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
dharma Buddhism, including works of the Vijñānavāda such as
the Mahāyānasamgraha-bhāşya, the Vijñaptimātratā-trimśikā--bhā-
şya, the Abhidharmasamuccaya-vyākhyā, etc., as well as those of
the Tathāgatagarbha Theory such as the Ratnagotravighāga, the
Buddhagotraśāstra and Paramārtha's translation of the Mahāyāna
samgraha-bhāşya.)
10. « Shintai-yaku Shōdaijōron-Seshin-shaku ni okeru Nyoraizē Setsu »
Jap.) (The Tathāgatagarbha Theory Appearing in Paramārtha's Transla-
tion of the Mahāyānasamgraha-bhāşya of Vasubandhu), “ Bukkyō Shisā
Ronshū"
Commemoration Volume for Prof. R. Yūki for his Sixtieth
Birthday, Tokyo, 1964, pp. 241–264.
(In this article, the close relationship between the Ratnagotravibhāga
and Paramārtha's said translation is made clear after picking up
the parallel passages in both texts, and the Buddhagotraśāstra
and the Anuttarâśrayasūtra as well. In conclusion, the author
suggested that the additional parts of the Mahāyānasamgrahabhā-
şya unique to Paramārtha's translation are probably written by
Paramārtha himself on the knowledge of the Ratnagotrabvibhāga
as he might have done the same with the Buddhagotraśāstra and
the Anuttarāśrâyasūtra, and that Vasubandhu, consequently
deprived of his authorship on the said parts as well as on the Buddha-
gotraśāstra, might have contributed little to the development of
the Tathāgatagarbha theory. cf. Introduction, Chap. V, § 2,3).
(JIBS = Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies).
In conclusion I would like to express my sincere gratitude to all the
professors mentioned above for their valuable assistance and encourage-
ment without which I could never have brought the book to completion.
However, the responsibility of the final result rests solely with the author.
I also wish to acknowledge with many thanks the troubles taken in the
past three years by the people at Is. M.E.O., especially Prof. Antonio
Gargano, who set my rather complicated manuscript into print and gave
it a nice arrangement.
Tokyo, 25 th August 1964.
J. TAKASAKI.
[ XIII ]



INTRODUCTION



INTRODUCTION
CONTENTS
PAGE
I.
The Ratnagotravibhāga, its Text, Translation, and Traditions concerning the
Author.
1. Text.
2. Translations & Traditions concerning the Author
5
6
II.
The Structure of the Text
1. Basic Text and Commentary
2. Chinese Account of the Basic Verses
3. Supposed Form of the Original Text
4. The Commentary and Later Additions
10
10
12
18
19
.
•
20
20
.
III. Keypoint of the Discourse
1. Ratnagotra, the Germ of the Three Jewels
2. 4 Aspects of the Germ
3. The Absolute .
23
26
.
.
32
32
34
35
.
IV. Genealogy of the Tathāgatagarbha Theory .
1. Sources of the Ratnagotravibhāga
2. Cittaprakſti and Āgantukaklesa
3. Buddhajñāna in the Avatamsaka
4. The Tathāgatagarbhasūtra
5. The Aryaśrīmālāsūtra
6. The Anūnatvâpūrņatvanirdeśa and the Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra
7. The Mahāyānasūtrâlankāra
36
.
.
37
39
40
.
.
V.
Works on the Tathāgatagarbha Theory Contemporary with or Succeeding the
Ratna.
1. The Mahāyānadharmadhātvaviśeşaśāstra
2. The Buddhagotraśāstra
3. The Anuttarâśrayasūtra
4. The Lařkāvatāra and the Mahāyānaśraddhôtpādaśāstra
45
45
47
49
53
.
VI.
The Position of the Ratna. in Mahāyāna Buddhism
1. The Ratna. as a Criticism on the Prajñāpāramitā
2. The Ratna. and the Vijñānavāda
3. Consideration on the Date and Authorship of the Ratna.
54
54
57
61
[ 3 ]



I.
THE RATNAGOTRAVIBHĀGA, ITS TEXT, TRANSLATION,
AND TRADITIONS CONCERNING THE AUTHOR
§ 1. - Text.
The Ratnagotravibhāga Mahāyānottaratantraśāśtra, on which this
present study is made, is one of the treatises on the Mahāyāna doctrine
written in Sanskrit. It was, however, quite recently that the Sanskrit
manuscripts were discovered and critically edited 1). Before then, it was
known only through the Tibetan and Chinese versions. The first introducer
of this text to the world of modern study was Dr. E. Obermiller who tran-
slated the Tibetan version into English and made this text famous under
the title of Uttaratantra according to the Tibetan tradition 2). In
China, however, they used the name “ Ratnagotra-śāstra ” as its title,
and this title was justified by the discovery of a Sanskrit fragment in Saka
script in which we find the title “Ratnagotravibhāga”. 3) Dr. E. H. John-
ston, the discoverer of this fact and the editor of the Sanskrit edition of
this text, suggested the use of “ Ratnagotravibhāga' as the proper title
showing the main subject of this text 4). This seems quite reasonable and I
followed him in this study. The reason for this will be made clear after-
wards.
1) The Ratnagotravibhāga Mahāyānottaratantraśāstra, ed. by E. H. Johnston, D.
Litt., and seen through the press and furnished with indexes by T. Chowdhury, M. A.,
Ph. D., Patna, 1950.
This edition is based upon two Mss. found by Rev. Rāhula Sānkſtyāyana in Tibet.
About the Mss., see JBORS, XXI, p. 31 (III. Şalu monastery, vol. XI-5, No. 43) and
XXIII, p. 34 (VII. Şalu monastery, vol. XIII-5, No. 242).
2) “ The Sublime Science of the Great Vehicle to Salvation, being a Manual of Buddhist
Monism, the work of Arya Maitreya with a commentary by Aryâsanga”. Acta Orientalia,
Vol. IX, parts ii, iii & iv, 1931.
3) “ A Fragment of the Uttaratantra in Sanskrit”, by H. W. Bailey & E. H. Johnston,
Bull. S.O.S., Vol. VIII, Part 1, 1935. The reference is to pp. 86 & 87.
4) E. H. Johnston, op. cit. (hereafter the abbreviation ‘J.' will be used for this
work) p. v, fn. 2.
[ 5 ]



J. TAKASAKI
About the manuscripts, I have nothing to add here to Johnston's
description as I have had no chance to examine them. Some notable
points for the present study are: 1) they belong to a considerably later
period in comparison with the date of the Chinese translation, and conse-
quently the latter, though it differs from the Sanskrit edition in several
passages, has its importance because of its antiquity; 2) they are identi-
fied almost completely with the Tibetan version; and 3) no mention of
the name of the author leaves room for taking the Chinese tradition into
consideration.
Johnston's critical edition, the basic text of my English translation,
shows his remarkable skill in editing Sanskrit manuscripts and is an ex-
cellent contribution to Buddhist scholarship. Nevertheless, I have found
some words and passages to be corrected in the light of the Tibetan and
Chinese translations, especially of the latter. Buddhist scholars should
regret that Dr. Johnston passed away before completing his learned analysis
of this text, and should continue to give it critical study. I believe my
work, however faulty, will cast some new light on the implications of
this text in Mahāyāna Buddhism.
§ 2. -
Translation and Traditions concerning the Author.
Prior to describing the contents of the Ratna., it will be necessary
to refer to the translations in Tibetan and Chinese, sub-sources of the
present work. Besides this, references will be made to traditions about
the author in Tibet and China, so that we can further consider the
authorship and date of the Ratna. in the absence of any material in the
Sanskrit manuscripts.
There are two versions of the Ratna. in Tibetan Tanjur:
1. Theg-pa-chen-porgyud-bla-maḥi bstan-bcos (Mahāyāna-utta-
ratantra-śāstra), Tohoku Catalogue No. 4024.
2. Theg-pa-chen-porgyud-bla-mahi bstan-bcos rnam-par-bśad-pa
(Mahāyāna-uttaratantra-śāstra-vyākhyā), Tohoku Catalogue No. 4025.
The second one is a full translation of the Sanskrit text, probably of
the same source as the present manuscripts, although it is called vyākhyā.
On the other hand, the first one consists merely of verses in the Ratna. Both
were translated, according to the colophon of these translations, by Blo-
ldan-ses-rab (Matiprajna) at Srinagar in Kashmir under the guidance of
Kashmirian pandits, Ratnavajra and Sajjana, about the end of the 11th
[ 6 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhā g a
cent. A.D. ,5). This name Sajjana reminds us of the author of the Mahāyā-
nôttaratantraśāstrôpadeśa, given as Satyajñāna by Johnston from the Patna
manuscript 6). If we can identify both names, the Mahāyānottaratantra-
śāstropadeśa, of which nothing is known except what Johnston tells us,
will be assured of its date in the same century ?).
Tibetan tradition attributes the first one, i.e. the verse section of the
Ratna. to Arya Maitreya (Hphags-pa Mgon-po byams-pa) and the
prose commentary (vyākhyā in the second), to Ācārya Asanga (Slob-dpon
Thogs-med) 8), and regards the Ratna. as one of “five treatises written
by Bodhisattva Maitreya, being his ultimate doctrine based upon the Praj-
ñāpāramitā ”9). This attribution to Maitreya of the verse section is traced
in the Saka script fragment referred to above, which quotes the opening
verse and the first few verses of Chapter III in the Ratna. as the work
of Bodhisattva Maitreya 10). This shows that Maitreya was regarded as
the author of the Ratna. not only in Tibet but also in Central Asia, and
probably in India, too, in the period between the 8th and 12th cent.
A.D. About the authorship of Asanga on the commentary, however,
nothing is mentioned anywhere else, and the point is undecided.
Chinese tradition offers a different name as to the author. The present
Chinese Tripitaka retains one translation of the Ratna. entitled Chiu-
ching yi-ch’eng pao-sing-lun” # - PE, lit. Uttara-
ekayāna-ratnagotra-śāstra) (Taisho, Vol. 31, No. 1611). It was tran-
slated by Ratnamati ( 8 P P.) in c. 511 A.D. at Lo-yang, the
capital of the Northern Wei dynasty.
According to the K’ai-yuan che-chiao mo-lu (W TO
*), an ancient Chinese catalogue of the Tripitaka (730 A.D.), there are
said to be two translations, one by Ratnamati and the other by Bodhiruci,
5) Sde-dge Edition, MDO XLIV, p. 129 a 5 ff. (Tohoku University Copy). Hereaf-
ter, the references to the Tibetan version are made according to this edition with the ab-
breviation, “Tib.' or 'T'. For the date and personage of Blo-Idan ses-rab, see George N.
Roerich, The Blue Annals, Part I, pp. 325-6, 328, 347–350, Calcutta 1949. (This is an
English translation of a history of Tibetan Buddhism called Deb-ther snon-po. According
to the translator's calculation, his date is 1059–1109 A.D.).
6) This work was reported by Rāhula Sāņkſtyāyana as one of three Mss. of the
Ratna. See JBORS, XXI, p. 33 (IV. Ngor monastery, Vol. VIII-6, No. 68).
?) I have intention to edit this work and have already asked for permission to
the authority of the Jayaswar Research Institute, Patna and to Prof. G. Tucci who has
got another photographic copy of thc same Ms.
8) Tib. p. 129 a 5.
9) See, Obermiller, op. cit. (hereafter the abbreviation “O'. will be used for this
work) p. 81 f.
10) “ A Fragment of the Uttaratantra”, pp. 86–89.
[ 7 ]



J. TAKASAKI
which is lost now 11). Furthermore it is said that both translators collabo-
rated at the beginning, but later on, because of the differences of opinions
between them, Bodhiruci made his own translation separately 12). This
record seems reliable at a glance since it is said to be taken from the
Pao-chung-lu ( BE ER), a missing catalogue compiled in c. 518 A.D.,
a few years after the date of translation of the Ratna. However, as the
result of critical examination of this record, it is clarified that the catalogue
was not directly based upon the Pao-ch'ung-lu, but upon the preceding
catalogues such as the Li-tai-san-pao-chi (
har i =**, 597 A.D.),
the Ta-tang nei-ten-lu , 664 A.D.), where the
record mentioned above concerned two other works, the Daśabhūmika-
sūtra-śāstra and the Ratnakūțasūtra-śāstra, and there is no evidence of
Bodhiruci's translation of the Ratna. at all 13). The record of the K’ai-
yuan-lu is perhaps created by misreading of these catalogues, and there
might be room for such misreading in the circumstances of Chinese Bud-
dhism in those days. Namely, the Ti-lun (school based upon
the Daśabhūmikasūtra-śāstra of Vasubandhu divided into two branches,
proclaiming Bodhiruci and Ratnamati as the nominal founder of each
branch, and this division is said to have had its root in the differences
of opinions due to the interpretation of the relation between "ālayavi-
jñāna' and “tathāgatagarbha' or “tathatā’14). The branch of Southern Path
of the Ti-lun school, founded by a pupil of Ratnamati, caused in later days
the rise of the Hua-yen , Avatamsaka) school which emphasizes
* cittamātra' theory of the Avatamsaka-sūtra along with dharmadhātu?
' tathāgatagarbha' against ' vijñaptimātratā' and 'ālayavijñāna' of the Fa-
hsiang (#) school founded by a disciple of Hsüang-chuang (Ž).
Thus Ratnamati and Bodhiruci were standing opposite to each other, and
11) Taisho, Vol. 55, No. 2154, pp. 541 a-b, 540 b, 608 c-609 a, 637 b, 690 b, 714 a.
12) Ibid., 540 b.
18) H. Ui, Höshöron-kenkyū (in Japanese), Tokyo, 1959, pp. 3–16. Cf. Li-tai san-
pao-chi, Taisho, Vol. 49, No. 2034, p. 866 b-c: + tuto (Daśabhū-
mikasūtraśāstra, 12 vols.); M A Y (Ratnakūtasūtraśāstra ēE
Witt E (two treatises mentioned above are also translated by
Bodhiruci). Nai-t'en-lu, Taisho, Vol. 55, No. 2149, 269 b: + :
- TE , PL (Ratnagotra-sõstra, 4 vols.); * , .
與土地二論菩提流支並譯 (this and the Daśabhūmika, these two
are also translated by Bodhiruci).
14) J. Takakusu, The Essentials of Buddhist Philosophy (First Indian Edition, 1956),
p. 114.
[ 8 ]



The Ratnagotra vibhāga
this conflict between them led people to imagine that Bodhiruci could
translate the Ratna. on the line of the Vijñānavāda. Actually however,
he did not do it, and since then the Ratna. was not recognized as the
authority for the Chinese Vijñānavādins, probably due to the fact that the
author of the Ratna. was thought not to be an orthodox Vijñānavādin
such as Asanga and Vasubandhu.
As will be made clear afterwards, the Ratna. takes the theory of the
tathāgatagarbha as its basic standpoint and is highly estimated by Fa-tsang
( E), the 3rd patriarch of the Hua-yen school. And it was he who
left the record on the authorship of the Ratna. He said in his commentary
on the Mahāyānadharmadhātvavićeșa-śästra te fille )
15) that Bodhisattva Kien-huei ), Sāramati ( 2 ),
in Sanskrit, was a Bodhisattva on the first stage' (HUE #4), born
in Central India 7 centuries after the Buddha's Mahāparinirvāṇa as a
member of a Kşatriya clan who after learning Buddhism, wrote the
Ratnagotravibhāga uttaratantraśāstra, the Dharmadhātvavićeşaśāstra and
others 16). This report, heard by Fa-tsang from Devaprajña (
#) the translator of the Dharmadhātvaviſeșaśāstra and a monk come
from Khotan, is reliable to some extent. At least, we may say Sāramati
was believed to be the author of the Ratna. till the end of the 7th
cent. A.D. in Central Asia. And we cannot find any other tradition
concerning the author of the Ratna. in China.
As far as the Chinese tradition is concerned, the authorship of Sāra-
mati on the Ratna. seems to be unchangeable. Still, there remains some
doubt. The reason is that there is no name of the author in the Chinese
translation nor in any of the old catalogues, and this translation consists
actually of two parts, namely: 1) the Kārikā text, an extract of certain ver-
ses in the Ratna., and 2) the whole work including the prose section but
excluding certain number of verses in the Kārikā text. This Kārikā text
is quite different from that of the Tibetan version, in that it omits those
verses which seem to be supplementary to the basic verses. From this fact
we feel the need of assuming the existence of, at least, two authors on the
Ratna., one heing that of the basic verses and the other the commentator
Here one may naturally call to mind the Tibetan tradition. But,
to settle this problem, we should examine the whole contents and charac-
teristics of this Ratna. We shall now proceed to the next stage.
on it.
15) Taisho, Nos. 1626 and 1627.
10) Ta-ch'eng-fa-chieh-wu-ch'a-pich-lun-chu (A FET EXHAUT)
Taisho, No. 1838, Vol. 44, p. 63 c.
[ 9 ]



J. TAKASAKI
II.
THE STRUCTURE OF THE TEXT
§ 1. - Basic Text and Commentary.
From the structural point of view, the present text of the Ratna. is
a combination of the basic text and a commentary thereon. That much
is regular in Buddhist literatures. The peculiarity of the Ratna. lies in
the fact that it consists of two parts, in verse and in prose, while the verse
section consists again of two parts, one basic, and the other supplementary.
In other words, the basic part of this text is merely of verses, while another
part, the commentary, is in verse and in prose and the prose section of
the commentary which follows the commentary verse or verses explaining
their meaning with quotations from various sūtras is quite detailed in
Chapter I, but quite scanty for other chapters.
To clarify this characteristic, let us take an example from the text.
The verse I, 4 which expresses devotion to the buddharatna' as the refuge
(saraṇa) is followed by v. I, 5 with a prose explanation of it and the latter
is again explained in detail by the following three verses and a prose com-
mentary which continues up to p. 10, 1. 14. Then the text proceeds to
the next subject, the dharma-ratna ’, beginning with v. I, 9 followed by
commentary verses and a prose commentary with a structure similar to
that of v. I, 4. If we take such verses as I, 4 & 9 to be typical, we may be
able to compile the Kārikā-text of the Ratna., and for this, we find that
the Chinese Kārikā text gives a fairly good account of those verses which
are basic or original.
More precisely, the Chinese Kārikā text is one of the aids for determining
them. In most cases, including the example given above, it offers us a
fairly good account of the basic verses. But we cannot accept the whole
text as basic. For example, the first 18 verses in that text are to be omitted
from this line as they are not available in either Sanskrit or Tibetan ver-
sions. They seem to be written by the Chinese translator. Besides these
18, we have another additional verse in the Chinese Kārikā text in the
last chapter maintaining the respect for the teacher of the Doctrine (dhar-
mabhāņaka). As its idea matches that of the 18 introductory verses, this
verse, too, seems to be composed by the translator 17). There are also a
17) C. p. 820 с. Emphasis on the respect for the “dharmabhāņaka’ was probably a
reflection of the historical circumstances in those days, e.g. persecution of the Buddhists
by the Huns, or something like that. The fact that Paramārtha's translation of the
[ 10 ]



The Ratna gotravib hāga
certain number of verses whose originality is doubtful to judge from the
contents. Only one thing we can say definitely: those verses which are
omitted from the Chinese Kārikā-text are by no means the original ones.
This is no doubt a kind of selection, but to go beyond this, we should
seek for other grounds.
Prior to v. I, 4, in the heading to that verse, it is said:
Uktaḥ śāstra-sambandhah //
Idānim slokānām artho vaktavyaḥ / -- / atas tat-prathamato buddha-
ratnam adhikſtya ślokaḥ |
And, as the heading to v. 1,9, it is said:
Ato buddha-ratnād dharma-ratna-prabhāvanéti tad-anantaram tad-
adhikſtya ślokaḥ /
This word • śloka’ is not used for the supplementary verses in these
cases, and v. I, 4 is the first verse for which the word • śloka' is applied;
furthermore, this selection of v. I, 4 as the first basic verse is identical
with that in the Chinese Kārikā text (except the 18 verses referred to above).
It shows the fact that the passage up to uktaḥ śāstra-sambandhaḥ/' is
the introduction by the commentator who thereafter begins to explain the
meaning of the 'ślokas', i.e. the basic verses. Being the explanation of the
meaning of śloka, the commentary seems to be called the “ Ślokârthasam-
grahavyākhyāna' as appeared in the colophons of Chapters I, IV, and V.
This limited usage of the word “ śloka' becomes, however, confused
after vv. I, 156–157 where the prose commentary disappears except for
headings, and the word “ śloka' is used for both basic and supplementary
How to interpret this confusion seems not so simple. Can we
ascribe it to the commentator's caprice or forgetfulness of the rule ? Shall
we assume another commentator in order to explain this change of style ?
Again, can śloka’ be construed as one kind of metre, i. e. Anusțubh,
when it is used for the commentary verses ?18) One of these three possibilities
must be in point, and I feel no necessity to change my former supposition.
Neither the Chinese Kārikā text nor the use of the word ' śloka' can
give the final account of the basic verses, but these two are certainly the
verses.
6
Mahāyānasamgraha-bhāsya, which retains Ratna. V, 16-28 at the end of the work
(Taisho. XXX, p. 270 a-b), omits this verse is another powerful proof in support of this
supposition.
18) All the commentary verses in Chapters II-V, which are called “śloka' in the
text, have the Anuştubh metre except for v. II, 73, which is, in turn, missing in the Chi-
nese version. And, because of a unique terminology used in this verse (e.g.' maharși’ is
used for the Bodhisattva), it seems to be a quotation from some old canonical work. So
the third assumption has no inconsistency.
[ 11 ]



J. TAKASAKI
most powerful bases for the selection, and those verses which are found
in the Chinese Kārikā text and called “ śloka' will be accepted as basic.
In this way, we shall evaluate all verses in the Chinese Kārikā-text.
§ 2. - Chinese Account on the Basic Verses.
Except for the 19 verses referred to above, all the verses in the Chinese
Kārikā text are found in the Sanskrit text. Not all of them are, however,
of the same character. Through their classification into certain groups,
we shall try to reconstruct the original text of the Ratna.
First of all, let us pick up those verses which are called “ śloka' in the
Sanskrit text. The result is as follows:
Chapter I. vv. 4, 9, 13, 23, 30, 35, 42, 45, 47, 49, 52–63, 66, 79,
84, 156-157. (27)
Chapter II. vv. 1*, 3, 8, 9*, 18–20, 29, 38–41, 62, 69. (14)
Chapter III. vv. 1. (1)
Chapter IV. vv. 1-2, 13* 41*. (4)
Chapter V. vv. 1-6, 16-25*. (16)
In this table, except for verses with the sign all are doubtless of
genuine character in their contents as well as their style. They express
the fundamental doctrine of this text and maintain a fairly archaic metre.
Furthermore, they are followed by the supplementary verses, they have
independent meaning and are understandable by themselves 19). On these
points, there will be no objection if we regard them as the basic verses.
The verses with the sign however, require some more careful
examination.
1) v. II, 1. This verse is of doubtful originality for the following
It shows, according to the commentator, 8 categories in regard
to the nirmalā tathatā' i. e. the 'dharmakāya’ and without other sup-
plementary and explanatory verses, itself has no independent meaning.
Formally, this verse is followed by the commentary in prose and verse.
And in this commentary verse called ' uddāna' (summary), the same ca-
tegories are repeated in different terminology. The structure presents
no doubt as to its originality; the point at issue is whether or not the
author of the original text tried such categorization.
This question is posed regarding v. I, 29, mentioned in the Chinese
Kārikā text but called merely • uddāna' in the Sanskrit text, and whose ter-
reason.
19) Sometimes, a series of verses expresses a united meaning under one subject word.
e.g. vv. I, 30, 35, 42 & 45. For them, the subject word is ‘jinagarbho 'yam' in v. 45.
[ 12 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
minology is exactly the same as v. II, 2, i. e. the commentary verse on v. II,
1, in showing 10 categories of the tathāgatagarbha.' In comparison with
v. II, 2, this v. I, 29 seems clearly to be a commentary verse.
Further-
more, the commentary sentence preceding this verse says:
pūrvataram tu yenârthena sarvatrâviſeșena pravacane sarvâkāram
tadarthasūcanam bhavati, tad apy adhikſtya nirdekşyāmi
This nirdeksyāmi' (I will explain) is immediately followed by uddanam'
and hence, against the Chinese tradition, there is no scope to treat this
as original.
As a consequence of denying the originality of v. I, 29, the categori-
zation of the tathāgatagarbha into 10 aspects also will be denied of origi-
nality. Hence, we incline to omit v. II, 1 from the line of original verses,
although it retains a comparatively old terminology 20).
2) v. II, 9. This verse is composed with a view to succeeding
detailed explanations of 9 examples of defilements which cover the tathā-
gatagarbha, illustrated in the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra and utilized in Chapter I.
Without a knowledge of those explanations, it cannot be understood inde-
pendently. And those verses explaining the 9 examples are, as will be
set forth below, of rather doubtful originality. The omission of that verse
therefore, depends on the originality of the latter verses. About its struc-
tural character, however, there is no doubtful point.
3) v. IV, 13. This verse, like v. II, 9, expects the existence of de-
tailed explanation which follows this verse. It is called, by the commen-
tator, “ sūtrasthānīya-śloka' (a stanza based upon the scripture) and the
following verses illustrating the examples in detail are called 'vistaravibhā-
ganirdeśa', and are actually taken from the Jñānâlokālaňkārasūtra. A
further discussion will be made below along with examination of these
illustrations.
In the same way, verses to be similarly considered are v. III, 4 and
vv. I, 96–98. Of them, v. III, 4 is called “ uddāna’ according to the
Tibetan and Chinese versions though not mentioned in the Sanskrit text 21).
In fact, all of these, including v. IV, 13, are 'uddāna' verses on the
20) See note on my translation, XII-11. Of the terms used for such categorization
in vv. I, 29 and II, 2, the first six, viz. svabhāva, hetu, phala, karman, yoga, and vștti, are
identical with those used in the Sūtrâlankāra (commentary on vv. IX, 59–60) and in the
Yogācārabhūmi (on “sabda-vidyā', . Taisho, 30, p. 361 a). This seems to show that such
categorization was commonly held for any subject, regardless of the author. Therefore
the question is to be limited to the categorization itself. See Appendix III.
21) T. .sdom-ni', c. =
[ 13 ]



J. TAKASAKI
illustrations taken from certain scriptures. In this sense, the possibility
of their being original depends on the originality of the illustrating verses
which follow them.
4) v. IV, 41. The Sanskrit text shows śloka' before this verse,
but the Tibetan and the Chinese texts do not. Actually, this one is in the
series of verses illustrating 9 examples on the acts of the Buddha, and we
have no need to discuss its originality separately.
5) vv. V, 16–25. The headings for these verses are missing in the
Sanskrit text but the Tibetan and Chinese versions retain them well. As
far as the structure is concerned, they are no doubt basic.
There is one verse to be taken as basic, even though it was kept out
of the table. It is v. I, 27. It expresses the fundamental idea of the Ratna.
and is so important that we cannot imagine the contents of this text wi-
thout this verse. Both the Chinese and Tibetan versions have confusion
in arranging this passage, but the Chinese commentary says in the heading:
as it is said in the Kārikā text (yathôktam śloka- or kārikā-granthe).”
On the other hand, v. I, 28, though it follows immediately after v. I, 27,
is clearly a commentary verse and possibly the original Sanskrit text had
a heading between these two verses.
As the result of examination, I will divide these verses discussed above
into two groups: 'pure’-śloka and “uddāna-śloka”. In the first
group,
those
verses mentioned in the table without the sign“ except for vv. V, 16–25,
and v. I,
I, 27 are included. On the other hand, the second
On the other hand, the second group includes
vv. I, 96-98; III, 4; IV, 13 as being 'sūtrasthānīya-uddāna.
sūtrasthānīya-uddāna. Verses II,
9 remain of doubtful position, and v. I, 29 and, with some hesitation,
v. II, l are also to be cancelled.
There is another kind of verses among the Chinese Kārikā text. This
is the three series of verses to be called “ udāharaṇa' taken from certain
scriptural passages, namely: 1) vv. I, 99–126, 9 udāharaṇas on the Essence
of Buddhahood covered with defilements, taken from the Tathāgatagar-
bhasūtra, 2) vv. III, 5–26, explanations on the 64 buddhaguņas, based
upon the Ratnadārikāparipṛcchā, and 3) vv. 27-30, 34–35, 41, 44-52
(with an additional one which is not found in Sanskrit), 55–57, 64–67 (with
an additional one which is not found in Sanskrit), 67–68, 71-76, 88, & 89-91,
9 udāharaṇas on the Buddha's Acts, taken from the Jñānâlokâlankārasūtra.
In general, these verses differ from those in the first group in their
being taken from a scriptural passage; and because of this characteristic,
we cannot call them genuine’ to this text in the same degree. They
have no original idea of the author but are merely newly composed verses'
by the author out of the basic scripture. In this sense, they are to be
termed sūtrasthānīya-udaharana '-verses. From the structural point
[ 14 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
of view, however, they seem not to be the commentator's work, as they
are followed by a certain number of verses showing udāharaṇānām pindar-
thaḥ'. The question is whether the same author of the “pure ’ -ślokas
had a share in composing this group of verses or not. And, if not, we shall
be obliged to suppose the existence of a second author between the author
of 'pure ’ -ślokas and that of the commentary. In this connection, one
thing to be noted is the counting of the 32' mahāpuruşalakṣaṇa' in Chap.
III. It contains actually more than 32 marks and some of them are not
available in works such as the Abhisamayâlaňkāra, attributed to Maitreya,
and the Prajñāpāramitāśāstra attributed to Nāgārjuna, although it agrees
with the Ratnadārikāsūtra 22). It seems to show that even the Ratna-
dārikāsūtra is composed after Maitreya and as far as this part is concerned,
Maitreya was not the author, against Tibetan tradition. As this part is
among the series of “ udāharaṇa ', all the udāharaņa groups and hence
the uddāna group as well, seem to belong to somewhat later days in com-
parison with the pure ’-śloka group.
We have another kind of question for Chapter IV. The Chinese Kā-
rikā text omits a fairly large number of verses which are kept among the
udāharaṇa-verses in the Sanskrit text and, furthermore, sometimes it also
changes the order. Of these omissions, the verses 36–40 along with the
passage between p. 102, 1. 20 and p. 104, 1. 12, and verses 59–62 along with
a heading are clearly the later additions because of their contents and
style. The second case concerns vv. 14-26 in the first udāharaņa, vv.
7. 31-
33 in the 2nd, vv. 42-43 in the 3rd, vv. 53-54 in the 4th, v. 63 in the 5th,
and vv. 69–70 in the 6th udāharaṇa. In each example these verses have
the same contents as those kept in the Chinese Kārikā text. In the first
case, it is difficult to decide whether the verses were added after the Chi-
nese translation was made or whether the Chinese translator omitted them
intentionally 23). It depends more or less on the reliability of the Chinese
Kārikā text as showing the original form of the text. This last point will
be proved by the examination of the third case.
The third case is less simple than the previous ones.
It is in the pas-
sage between p. 112, 1. 1 and p. 113, 1. 4. Of those verses contained in
this passage, v. 88 is placed in the Chinese version immediately after v. 76,
and vv. 89–91, at the end of the first udāharaṇa with a heading saying:
anutpădânirodhas tathāgata iti. The first one is, according to the Sanskrit
22) Detailed comparison on each ‘mark among various scriptures is given in my
note on the equivalent passage in the English translation.
23) Note that such repetition of the same idea is seen in the udāharaṇa verses in
Chapter I.
[ 15 ]



J. TAKASAKI
text, one of 4 ślokas which show the udāharaṇa-samgraha. As a whole,
this udāharaṇa-samgraha seems to be a later addition since its termino-
logy is never seen in other passages and this part is situated after the
udāharaņa-piņdârtha of 9 examples. But why was only one of the four
kept in the Chinese version ? V. 88 is a verse which shows the significance
of the three udāharaṇas beginning with the 7th. Such a kind of verse is
observed in every udāharaṇa up to the 6th with a special heading like
atatprahitānām ātmāparādhe ' before v. 41 (2nd ud.), bhājana-vimātra-
tāyām’ before v. 46 (3rd ud.), etc. Verses as such are lacking from the 7th
to 9th udāharaṇa in the present Sanskrit text, v. 88 must have
represen-
ted them in the basic text for the Chinese translation. Addition of vv. 85-
87 with the heading must be the result of misundertanding of the role
of v. 88 as simple summarization of the three udāharaṇas by a certain
Sanskrit copyist of later days. Difference of metre between vv. 85-87
and v. 88 yields another proof for this supposition 24). However, it poses
another question about the omission of v. 70 in the Chinese Kārikā text.
This verse occupies the same position for the 6th udāharaṇa as v. 88 for
the 7th-9th. If we admit such an omission by the Chinese translator him-
self, the omission in the second case in general will also be ascribed to the
Chinese translator and the reliability of the Chinese version will decrease.
There must have taken place an artificial selection by the Chinese tran-
slator, and as a result, those omissions in the second case may be added
to the Udāharaņa group.
As for the next ones, i. e. vv. 89-91, the problem is not of their genuine
character but of their place in the text, i. e. whether they belong to the
Kārikā text as the Chinese version does, or to the commentary as in the case
of the Sanskrit text. The Chinese treatment is acceptable for the following
reasons: 1) These verses show the significance of the 1st udāharaņa as v. 41
does for the 2nd: 2) The Jñānâlokālāňkārasūtra, the basic scripture for
the 9 udāharaņas, has a similar verse between the udāharaņas; 25) and con-
24) I have previously expressed my opinion that the whole of this passage is a later
interpolation, but is kept in the basic text of C. tr.: and C omitted the three verses by
mistake. (“The textual structure of the Ratnagotravibhāga and the supposed form of
its original text”, in Jap., The Journal of Religious Studies, No. 155). Here I have cor-
rected it according to Dr. Ui's opinion. See H. Ui, op. cit., p. 265.
25) In the said sūtra, the anutpădânirodhatā of the Buddha is repeated at the end of
every udāharaṇa up to the 4th, and at the end of the 4th ud. the sūtra has a summarized
verse on this point. In the oldest version of the sūtra, i.e. the second Chinese tran-
slation, in the absence of the illustrations of dundubhi and the following two, this summar-
ized verse comes immediately after the 1st ud. The verse in the said sūtra is as follows:
1. 如來常不生諸法亦復然世間無實法 愚癡
[ 16 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhā g a
tinuity between v. 84 and v. 92 as given by the Chinese version seems to
be consistent. At the same time, however, there remain some difficulties
in accepting it. Namely, 1) the subject 'anutpădânirodhatā' of the Tathā-
gata is the basic point throughout Chap. IV as well as the Jñānâlokālan-
kārasūtra 26); 2) their contents and wording are quite like to the commen-
tary verses, especially the term darśanâdi' in v. 91 is akin to “ navadhā
darśanâdikam ’in v. 84 which expects the existence of v. 81 27). Thus the
Sanskrit text also can claim its reasonability of their treatment. In view
of the antiquity of the Chinese version, however, the case was most proba-
bly as follows: vv. 89-91 along with an additional verse in the Chinese Kārikā
text were originally kept at the end of the 1st udāharaņa but with slightly
different terms in the second pāda of v. 91; but afterwards, in the thought
that the subject is not exclusive to the 1st udāharaṇa but common to the
whole
passage, the Sanskrit copyist shifted them to the commentary, chan-
ging some words as seen in the present text and adding an explanatory
heading (p. 112, 11. 18–20). As far as this point is concerned, the Chinese
version recovers its reliability to some extent, but unless we could recon-
struct the original form of v. 91 28), we should treat vv. 89–91 as the com-
mentary verses, being a part of the udāharaņa-piņdârtha.
安取相無漏善法中無如及如來依彼善法
力現世如鏡像
(Taisho. Vol.12, p.242 b)
2. 如來常住示生不滅 非心非色非有非無
如琉璃地見宮殿影此影非有亦復非無
眾生心淨見如來身非有非無亦復如是
(ibid. p.
251a)
26) See above (n.25); The Ratna, p. 9, 1.7(= Taisho, bid., p.240 b).
27) v. 91: ayatnāt kệtyam ity evam darśanâdi pravartate /
dharmakāyād anutpădânirodhād ā bhavasthiteḥ ||
v. 84: ayam ca prakſto 'trârtho navadhā darśanâdikam /
janmântardhim ſte śāstur anābhogāt pravartate //
v. 81: darśanādeśanā vyāptir vikſtir jñānaniḥsſtiḥ /
mano-vāk-kāyaguhyāni prāptiś ca karuņâtmānām 1!
88) For y. 91, C.
此業自然有見是等現前法身不生滅盡諸際常住
It can be otherwise translated into the following way:
This action takes place without effort, and one perceives this and that appearance
(although) the dharmakāya has neither origination nor destruction and is eternal as long
as the world exists.
[17]



J. TAKASAKI
§ 3. - Supposed Form of the Original Text.
As the result of examination of the Chinese Karikā text, we have
arrived at the conclusion that 1) the Chinese Kārikā text does not stand for
the original text; even the existence of the Kārikā text of such form at the
time when the Chinese translation was made is doubtful, but 2) it keeps a
fairly good account of those verses which are “not the commentary verses ',
and 3) those verses retained in the Chinese Kārikā text are to be divided
into 3 groups: A. 'pure ’-śloka-group, B. ' uddāna '-group, and C. udā-
haraņa ’-group; 4) in Chapter IV some verses among the Sanskrit text are
to be added to the C-group, and 5) of these 3 groups, B. & C. are some-
what of later days.
The problems remaining after this examination are the treatment of
v. II, 9, and the form of the original text. One way to solve these problems
is to treat v. II, 9 as an insertion made simultaneously with the B.—and
the C.-group by the second author, and regard the A.-group as consisting
of the original form of text. By this, we can get 59 verses as original.
This seems consistent in its form, as it matches the use of the title of the
commentary, 'ślokârthasamgrahavyākhyāna”. Strictly speaking, however,
it leaves us in some doubt regarding the inconsistency of numbers in
each chapter or subject 29).
Another way is to cut out all verses, starting with those in Chapter
II as well as v. 23 of Chapter I from the line of the original verses, and
regard them along with v. II, 9 and verses in the B. & the C.-groups as
the secondary addition. In this way only 27 verses in Chapter I remain
as original. The reasons are 1) vv. I, 156–157, which express the “deśanā-
prayojana’, can stand for a kind of conclusion and by this passage, i. e. in
Chapter I, the tathāgatagarbha being the ratnagotra is sufficiently explai-
ned, 2) the last verse of Chapter V. (v. 25) which expresses the faith in the
Buddha Amitāyus is not essentially connected with the contents of Chapter
I. Denial of the originality of chapters other than Chapter I consequen-
tly means the denial of the idea of the 4 aspects of the ratnagotra. That is
why I omitted v. I, 23 from the line of original verses. Thereby, all kinds
of 'classification' are deprived of this text. There is no possibility of abrid-
ging the original form of the text more than this. This supposition, howe-
ver, increases the importance of the supposed second author with regard
to establishing the system of the tathāgatagarbha theory as appearing in the
present Sanskrit text. And even if the Chapters after II were the later
29) It is, of course, not necessary to presume the existence of a text with 3 chapters.
[ 18



The Ratnagotravibhāga
addition, they had been no doubt composed before the commentary was
made. In this sense, I shall treat in my translation all the verses in the
A. B. C. groups, including v. II, 9 as the “basic verses for commenting
(it means neither original verses nor“ śloka ’s) under the name of “kārikā '30).
§ 4. - The Commentary and Later Additions.
There seems to be no difficult point to discuss about the commentary.
Its style is consistent throughout the text except for the fact that the prose
commentary disappears after Chapter II. This fact is construed as indi-
cating that the commentator attached the main importance to Chapter I,
and felt no necessity for detailed comment on other Chapters.
One thing to be noticed here are the omissions and additions in the
Sanskrit text as compared with the Chinese version. Besides small differen-
ces between them, which will be referred to in the notes on my English
translation, the passages to be added to the commentary as missing in the
Sanskrit text and subtracted from it as additions in later days, are as follows:
A. Omissions
1) one commentary verse and its prose explanation on p. 16, 1. 15
(before na hi jātu...) (C. p. 825 b)
2) one commentary verse and its prose explanation on p. 31, 1. 16
(before samsāraduḥkha-) (C. p. 829 c-830 a)
3) a quotation on the parable of a castle taken from the Rat-
nacūdasūtra after 'nagarôdāharanam/' on p. 50, 1. 16 (C. p. 843 c)
4) two commentary verses before v. 1, 64 (p. 46, C. p. 832 c)
B. Additions
1) p. 51, l. 10 - p. 53, 1. 8 (with a heading aparaḥ ślokârthah) -
10 verses and prose commentary.
2) p. 102, l. 20 – p. 104, 1. 12
3) p. 108, 1. 3-12.
probably 4) p. 112, 11. 1-13,18–20.
Most of these passages were already noticed by the editor of the San-
skrit text, and no explanation will be necessary for the present. Other
minor points with respect to the structure of the text will be noticed in
each passage of the translation.
30) 27 verses, being the supposed form of the original text, will be mentioned in Ap-
pendix I.
[ 19 ]
3



J. TAKASAKI
III.
KEYPOINT OF THE DISCOURSE
§ 1. - Ratnagotra, the Germ of the 3 Jewels.
Mahāyāna Buddhism, in its philosophical approach, may generally be
characterized as Monism (or Absolutism) which admits the unique Abso-
lute 31) or Ultimate Entity, proved through the essential identification
(advayatā) of various phenomena. And each phenomenon, just because
of its being merely an aspect (or face, feature, or form) of the Absolute,
cannot be the Entity different from other phenomena, and itself has no
reality. But, through its being “identical' with the Absolute, every phe-
nomenon has the characteristics of being 'real' and is “identical' with
each other as they stand for the Absolute in one of its various aspects ' 32).
This work, being a treatise on Mahāyāna Buddhism, is to be charac-
terized as monistic in its philosophical approach. Though monism is
one, there is a variety of forms, and this variety of forms is due to the
different emphasis in each text, and this difference of standpoint gradual-
ly causes the division of various schools within Mahāyāna Buddhism.
In other words, the difference of standpoint means:
6 to which aspect of
the Absolute, is the emphasis given in the text ? ” In this sense, we may
define the characteristics of this text as a treatise, analyzing (vibhāga)
the Absolute, or Ultimate Entity from its aspect of ' ratnagotra'. This
31) Having come with connotations of Western philosophy, the word ' Absolute'
contains an idea somewhat different from that in Indian philosophy and hence it is not
perfectly proper to use this word for expressing the idea which is to be discussed here.
In the case of the Vedānta Philosophy, the Brahman (or Ātman) is nearer to the Absolute
in Western philosophy in its character than what is corresponding to it in Buddhism.
But since Buddhism denies the existence of such an eternal substance as Brahman,
the use of the word. Absolute seems quite improper. Still Buddhism has its own idea
of something immutable (asamskſta), though its character is quite different from that of
Brahman and there is no fixed term like Brahman to express it. In this respect, I dared
adopt the word Absolute' as a general term for what is immutable in Buddhism.
See H. v. Glasenapp, Buddhismus und Gottesidee, S. 99 (Abhandlungen der Akademie der
Wissenschaften und der Literatur, Geistes und Sozialwissenschaftliche Klasse, Jahrgang
1954, Nr. 8).
82) On the other hand, the so-called Hinayāna Buddhism whose representative is
the doctrine of the Sarvāstivādin may be characterized as Realism declaring each element
(dharma) as real. See Th. Stcherbatsky, The Conception of Buddhist Nirvāņa, p. 40.
[ 20 ]
NA



The Ratnagotra vibhāga
6
6
is the significance of the title ' ratnagotravibhāga', and by this the contents
of the text is fully expressed.
Then, what is ‘ ratnagotra’ ? This word is interpreted by the commen-
tator as 'gotram ratnatrayasya' (v. I, 24), the Germ of the 3 jewels,
and explained in the śloka (v. I, 23) as vișayaḥ paramârthadarśinām
śubharatnasargako yataḥ', the sphere of those who have the highest per-
ception from which the pure 3 jewels rise. Here, ' gotra' means something
original, while “ratnatraya', its result. The word “gotra' is one of the
special terms difficult to be conveyed by any other language, but the
basic line of interpretation for this word among the Buddhist literatures
is ‘gotra'
=“dhātu?
hetu', or “gotra' • bīja’ 33), and hence it may
be translated into English by "element', 'cause', source', 'origin',
'basis', 'ground', “essence', 'nature. In India, however, by a com-
mon use, this word means “family', clan' or “ lineage ? 34), and analogi-
cally, it is used in the sense of' germ ', ' mine or matrix ' 35). Actually,
in the word “ gotra ', all of these senses are included, and besides dhātu',
hetu' and “bīja', as synonyms of "gotra' with the range of senses, we
can get various words such as “ pada ’, āśraya ’,
āśraya', 'mūla', 'sthāna' (for
“ basis or ground '); “ nidāna’ (for' cause '); “svabhāva’, “prakſti”, “dhar-
ma ’ (for nature ?); “ sāra' (for ' essence '); ' nidhi ’, nidhāna”,
• ākara'
(for mine '), 'yoni”, garbha' (for “matrix '); vamśa' (for lineage);
or
6
33) Abhidharmakośakārikā, 1, 20 (dhātu means gotra); The Ratna. p. 72.10 (hetvar-
tho’tra dhātvarthaḥ); Yogācārabhūmi. Part 1, (ed. by Vidhushekhara Bhattacharya, Cal.
cutta, 1957), p. 26, Il. 18–19: bijaparyāyāḥ punar dhātur gotram prakſtir hetuḥ satkāya
prapañca ālaya upādānam duḥkham satkāyadſstyadhisthānam asmimănâdhisthānam cêty
evam bhāgīyāḥ paryāyā veditavyâḥ, Bodhisattvabhūmi (ed. by U. Wogihara), p. 3, 1. 6: gotram
bijam ity apy ucyate. See Edgerton, BHS Dic., gotra s.v.
As for the development of the idea of 'gotra' within Buddhist thought, see Ober-
miller's introduction to the Uttaratantra. It gives a good summary of the development of
the idea from the Vinaya to the Yogācāra system through the Sarvāstivāda and the Sau-
trāntika, but as it is merely based upon Tibetan information (the Gser-phren, a commen-
tary on the Abhisamayâlankāra by Tson-kha-pa, and the Phar-phyin skabs brgyad-ka, Eight
Chapters on the Pāramitā, of Jam-yan-shad-pa), a more detailed and thorough investi-
gation on this subject based upon the Pāli, Sanskrit, and Chinese sources will be required.
Gotra’ is originally a term used in the Indo-Aryan society since the pre-Vedic
age, and signifies usually an exogamous unit of families of the same lineage within the
Brahmin clan. Significance of 'gotra' in the Brahmanical system was sought for by
J. Brough in his work, The Early Brahmanical System of Gotra and Pravara, a Trans-
lation of the Gotra-pravara-mañjali of Puruşottama-Pandita with an Introduction”,
Cambridge, 1953.
35) Edgerton regards the sense of 'a mine' as uniquely belonging to Buddhist texts.
In his opinion, an objection is raised by V. Raghavan (“ Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit”,
Indian Linguistics, Chatterjee Jubilee Volume, Journal of the Linguistic Society of India,
Vol. 16, p. 322).
34) 6
[ 21 ]



J. TAKASAKI
6
6
* parigraha' (for “family ') etc. 36). On the other hand,“ ratna' or rat-
natraya' is a name for the Absolute when it is regarded as the “sarana'
(refuge), or the object of worship. Par excellence, it is the buddharatna',
and the other two, i. e. the ' dharmaratna' and sangharatna’ are merely
the 'natural outflow' (dharmatānisyanda) of the former 37) (p. 7). In this
sense, 'ratnatraya’ is synonymous with 'buddha', 'tathāgata', or “jina'.
And combining these terms of both sides, we can get those terms like
tathāgatagarbha', 'buddhagarbha', “jinagarbha '; 'tathāgatadhātu',
dhadhatu’; "tathāgatagotra’, “buddhgotra', etc. as synonyms of "ratna-
gotra'. Thus we know the word ' ratnagotra' used in the title indicates
what is called “tathāgatagarbha' and this text is a treatise on the Tathā-
gatagarbha theory.
Then again, how are these terms ' tathāgatagarbha' or ' tathāgatagotra'
employed ? The tathāgatagarbha is, in a concrete way, a name for 'satt-
vadhātu', the multitude of the living beings. This 'sattvadhātu ’, or
• sattvarāśi' (in other words, sarvasattvāḥ, sarva-dehinaḥ, all living beings)
is, according to the text, called “tathagatagarbhāḥ', those who have the
Matrix of the Tathāgata, just because 1) the Wisdom of the Buddha
penetrates it, 2) it is by nature identical with purity, i. e. the Absolute,
and 3) it is the 'gotra', through which the result, i. e.
or, par excellence, the Tathāgata makes its appearance (v. I, 27).
The point of its identity with the Absolute lies in its ' essential purity'
(prakſty-asamklistatā) (v. I, 30) which is found in the innate mind'
(cittaprakſti) of living beings (v. I, 49). Through the purity of the
innate mind, all living beings, irrespective of their conditions or appea-
rances, are identical with each other. The existence of this purity, common
to all living beings, is proved by the all-pervadingness of the Wisdom
of the Buddha, in other words, by that of the Body of the Absolute (dhar-
makāya) (v. I, 28). At the same time, despite the existence of purity, the
living beings differ from each other owing to their appearances, namely
the different degrees with regard to the 'impurity' on the pure innate
mind, and have various names, viz. “the ordinary beings', “the Saints ’,
or the Buddha' (v. I, 47) 38). This impurity' is, however, not essenti-
ally connected with them, but merely temporally associated with them as
the accidental defilement (āgantukaklesa) and itself has no reality because
6
36) All of these terms are taken from this text.
37) This point is taken from the Śrimālāsūtra and is called the 'ekayāna' theory
being one of the characteristics of Mahāyāna Buddhism.
38) In another place, (v. I, 47) they are classified into sattvadhātu, bodhisattva, and
tathāgata ', but essentially there is no difference between the two kinds of classification
(the Saints are par excellence“ bodhisattvas ’ in the Mahāyāna Buddhism).
6
[ 22 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
it is constructed by the “irregular thought' (ayonisomanasikāra) (v. I,
60–63). Therefore, it is removable from them and when they remove it
by realizing its accidental nature, i. e. when they accomplish the purifi-
cation, they become the Buddha. Because of this possibility, the sattva-
dhātu is the ‘gotra' of the Buddha, and its pure innate mind is
regarded as the Buddhahood (buddhatva) or the Essence of the Buddha
(buddhadhātu).
Those are the essential characteristics of the tathāgatagarbha, which
at the same time constitute the core of the doctrine described in this
text 39).
§ 2. - 4 Aspects of the Germ.
On the basis of the essential characteristics of the tathāgatagarbha
referred to above, the text explicates the doctrine in five chapters 40), under
the titles: 1) Tathāgatagarbha, 2) Bodhi, 3) Guņa, 4) TathāgatakȚtyakriyā,
and 5) Anusamsa, respectively. Of these five, the last chapter is the
conclusion in which the merits of having faith in this doctrine of the tathā-
gatagarbha are described. The other four stand for the 4 aspects of the
gotra, which are mentioned in v. I, 23 and which show its inconceiva-
bility in each respect (v. I, 24) while Chapter I includes 3 ślokas on the
ratnatraya and the commentary thereon, along with the commentator's
introduction 41).
Thus, these 4 aspects of the gotra form the basic frame of this text and
the authors refer to them in various places with various denominations.
It would be better to pick up such denominations before analysing their
characteristics and significance.
1) dhātu, bodhi, guņa, karman. (v. I, 1)
2) garbha (jñānadhātu-āptinistha), agrabodhi (jñānâpti), dharmāh,
sattvarthakȚt. (v. I, 3).
3) samalā tathatā, nirmalā tathatā, vimalā buddhaguņāḥ, jinakriyā.
(v. I, 23)
39) The whole account of this passage on the ffundamental characteristics of the
ratnagotra' was taken from what I considered as the original text.
40) The Chinese version gives 11 chapters, dividing the Chapter on the Tathāgata-
garbha into 7. But this division has probably no source in the basic text for the Chinese
translation.
41) The commentary mentions the 3 Jewels along with 4 aspects of the Germ in its
open verse and calls them the 7 vajrapadas. But this categorization does not have as
much significance as the 4 aspects of the gotra.
[ 23 ]



J. TAKASAKI
4) bodhya, bodhi, bodhyangāni, bodhana. (v. I, 26)
5) buddhadhātu, buddhabodhi, buddhadharmāḥ, buddhakſtya. (v. V, 1)
6) vyavadānadhātu, amalā bodhi, guņāḥ, karman (v. V, 25)
7) āśraya, tadparāvștti, tadguṇāḥ, arthasādhana. (v. V, 7)
Of these four, the first aspect represents the tathāgatagarbha or the gotra,
and the second, what is to be called the Absolute. The interrelation bet-
ween these two is that of 'cause' and 'result’. On the other hand, the third
aspect signifies the attributes or the qualities of the Buddha, being insepa-
rable from him; the fourth, the acts of the Buddha, being the natural out-
flow of the Buddhahood. Because the Buddha is one aspect of the Ab-
solute, the latter two are said to relate to the Absolute as being ' attribute'
and ' function ’inseparable from the Absolute or' substance ', so to say 42).
At the same time, because of its identity with the Absolute, the tathāgata-
garbha is said to be endowed with the same qualities and acts as those
of the Buddha. 43). In this respect, these two are regarded as aspects
of the gotra. Therefore, these two latter aspects are less independent
and less important than the former two and can be included in one
of them.
Thus, the 4 aspects of gotra are fundamentally reducible to two aspects,
cause and 'result ’. Taking an example from the table mentioned
above, they are to be termed as “ bodhya' and 'bodhi'. Gotra is different
from the Absolute in its being actually not enlightened (abudha) (v. I,
but it has a relation to the latter in its being “ bodhya’, i. e. 'to be enligh-
tened' or 'capable of getting bodhi'. Because of this capability, gotra
has obtained its name of 'cause ', and this capability is sought for in the
fact (or postulate) that gotra is (or is to be) essentially identical with the
Absolute (tathatâvyatireka). This relationship is expressed in another
couple of terms, samalā tathatā and nirmalā tathatā. Here, the difference
between two aspects is shown by each attribute, samalā and nirmalā, while
the identity of both is expressed by the term tathatā. Tathatā, the Abso-
lute, is characterized as nirmalā in comparison with gotra, though it is
common to both. Here we may notice that there are two aspects of the
Absolute, and for the result ’-aspect, the Absolute as in common with the
4),
42) The relationship between the Absolute and attributes is often expressed by the
term 'avinirbhāga, amuktajña (avinirmuktajñāna) (p. 3.4 ff. &c.) and similes of lantern
and ocean are used for its explanation (v. I, 42). For the acts of the Buddha, they are
ragarded somehow as the natural outflow of the Buddha's Compassion (karuņā) towards
living beings (v. I, 4 cd).
43) V. I, 49; I, 155 and v. I, 42 and commentary thereon (on yogârtha). (guņa-
prakſtiyogataḥ), p. 66.19 (anādicittavyavadānadharmasahajâvinirbhāgatā), etc.
[ 24 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāg a
gotra is the ground'. In other words, the Absolute can be established
as 'result' because it is in common with the gotra.
This Absolute, as common to both cause and result, is therefore to
be regarded as the third aspect which is necessary to establish the relation-
ship of cause and result. It may be termed 'ground'-aspect or "medium?
aspect, and including this aspect, we know, 3 aspects are often used for
analyzing the tathāgatagarbha in this text.
The first application of the 3 aspects theory is v. I, 26 where the Ab-
solute is on the one hand regarded as phala under the name of ratnatraya
and on the other hand as pratyaya for establishing ratnatraya (i. e. buddha)
under the name of bodhi in comparison with the gotra's being hetu. Here
the third aspect is characterized as ' medium' (pratyaya) and on the basis
of bodhi as medium, cause and result are called bodhya and buddha, respec-
tively. Another kind of, and more important, division of the 3 aspects
is what is called svabhāvatraya of gotra (p. 69. 17 ff) by the commentator
based upon v. I, 27. The names of the 3 aspects are dharmakāya, tathatā,
and tathāgatagotra. If we apply the same idea of ‘ medium' in this case,
tathatā will be regarded as "medium', and dharmakāya as result since
the word dharmakāya stands for one aspect of buddha showing his essential
nature. According to the commentator, however, dharmakāya is inter-
preted as the Absolute itself, being the ground' which renders gotra as
'cause', while tathatā is explained as tathāgata in the sense tathatā sud-
dhim āgatā', and regarded as result’. Here, the third aspect is prefe-
rably called ground', and 'result ’ is considered to become one with
the ground, i. e. the Absolute ’. For 'ground' of ' cause
cause ’, if we restrict
the observation only to the relationship between dharmakāya and tathāgata-
gotra, the former is to be regarded as
and the latter, as ` result '.
In this case, tathatā stands again for 'medium ’-aspect.
By examining in this way, we come to know that these aspects are
interchangeable according to the respective standpoint. From the stand
point of 'gotra’, dharmakāya and tathatā are either “result' or 'ground',
while from the standpoint of the Absolute, gotra is result' as well as
cause ’. 44) Such is the fundamental structure of the Absolute and its
aspects in this text. Next, let us examine the characteristics of the Abso-
lute, taking this structure into consideration and subsequently clarifying
the process from 'cause' to 'result ’.
9
6
44) The word tathāgatagarbha is interpreted in the Ratna. in three ways, namely:
1) tathāgatasya ime garbhāḥ sarvasattvāḥ, (p. 70.17); 2) tathāgatas tathataîşām garbhaḥ
sarvasattvānām, and 3) tathāgatadhātur eşām garbhaḥ sarvasattvānām. They correspond
to dharmakāya, tathatā, and tathāgatagotra, respectively. See my translation of each
passage.
[ 25 ]



J. TAKASAKI
§ 3. - The Absolute.
The Absolute is expressed in various terms in this text. But in its
fundamental characteristics, these terms can be divided into two groups:
to one group belong those expressing the Absolute from the ground'-
aspect, to the other those doing the same from the result ’-aspect.
Of course both aspects are interchangeable as has been seen in the case
of dharmakāya' and “tathatā' in the preceding passage. From the
standpoint of the development of the idea or from the literal meaning
of each term, however, such a division seems possible.
Originally and basically the Absolute in Buddhism is dharma, the
universal law, or the highest truth (paramârthasatya), which is unchangea-
ble and immutable (asamskȚta) and whose contents are expressed by the
4 āryasatya of duḥkha, samudaya, nirodha and mārga, or by the terms,
pratītyasamutpāda, śūnyatā, etc. This truth is to be realized by oneself
pratyātmavedanīya') as the Buddha did for the first time, and hence, is
characterized as adhigamadharma'. Thus the Buddhist Absolute, being
the truth, is 'impersonal’ and ' attainable ’; in those two points we can
find the peculiarity of the Buddhist Absolute, and based upon these two
characteristics, the Buddhist Absolute expands its contents in two direc-
tions 45).
Firstly, as this 'impersonal' truth shows the real nature of things',
this nature is also regarded as the Absolute under the names of dharmatā'
(= dharmasvabhāva), “tathatā' or 'tattva' (suchness). Being the nature
of things, it penetrates all things or phenomena including the living
beings, and hence the universe is called ' dharmadhātu', the realm of truth
which is the essence of the nature (tattvasya lakṣaṇam) and is regarded
as the Absolute itself in the sense of “reality'. Thus the all-pervadin-
gness, and hence the oneness of the Absolute, is introduced into the
conception of Buddhist Absolute. This is nothing but the ground -
aspect of the Absolute.
On the other hand, the character of being attainable’ introduces
the result ’-aspect and is shown by the absolutization of the Buddha
caused by veneration and glorification of the Buddha as the founder among
Buddhist followers. This is a kind of personification of the Absolute,
45) The following description does not exactly follow a historical development of
the idea but is made with a logical approach. Sanskrit terms mentioned with quotation
marks in the following passage are the technical terms on the Absolute used in
the Ratna.
[ 26 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāg a
6
6
but even in this case, if one may discuss the matter apart from the religious
feeling, the Buddha is regarded as 'impersonal', the manifestation of the
truth, since he realized the truth and his essence or nature as being “ bud-
dha’ lies in his realization (“bodhi ') of the truth. Thus the absolutization
of the Buddha consists in making the Buddha impersonal and this Buddha
as the Absolute is called dharmakāya’. At the same time, the term
* buddha' is originally applicable to any person as an adjetive. Namely,
anybody can become 'buddha' if he experiences and practises what the
Gautama Buddha did; in other words, the state of “buddha' is attainable
as the result of practice. In this sense, the existence of an innumerable
number of Buddhas is possible and even ordinary beings, though they
are actually not the Buddha, are postulated to have the same nature
as the Buddha. This same nature is called “gotra' or dhātu
and the
existence of this nature is explained by the expression dharmakāyapa-
rispharaṇatā' or buddhajñānântargama’-tva.
Besides 'buddha' and 'bodhi', there is another important term for
the Buddhist Absolute. It is “ nirvāṇa’. This term was absolutized even
in the Pāli and in the Adhidharma Buddhism as an idea contrary to sam-
sāra and is stated to be the realm of peace (* śāntipatha '). Mahāyāna
Buddhism rebelled against the dualistic conception of Nirvāṇa and Samsāra
and emphasized the oneness of both in the sense that Nirvāṇa is the only
reality; and Nirvāṇa was regarded as synonymous with "dharmatā', 'dhar-
madhātu', or dharmakāya'. Originally, however, by nirvāna' is meant
a state ' attained' by the Buddha and hence, like “ bodhi’, it shows the
result ’-aspect of the Absolute. In the case of bodhi', the intuition
(prajñā) or wisdom (jñāna) by which the Buddha attained the enlighten-
ment occupies an important place and is elevated to identity with the
Absolute under the name of 'prajñāpāramitā' or 'buddhajñāna' as the
essential nature of the Buddha. On the other hand, in the case of ' nir-
vāņa', the emphasis is on the disappearance or extinction (kşaya, ni-
rodha) of defilements (klesa) and hence the term nirvāṇa is much related
to the purification of mind (cittavyavadāna). Both of these attainments
of ‘jñāna' and vyavadāna’, are, however, combined in
the sine qua non for the realization of the Absolute, and consequently
there is no strict distinction of use between both terms, nirvāņa’ and
• bodhi'.
Introduction of the result-aspect into the Absolute thus effected
the absolutization of Buddha, of the attained state, and even of the medium
or instrument for such an acquisition. For the introduction of such a
conception, we cannot overlook a rather primitive and magical idea that
to know something is to become itself, which is believed commonly in India
6
one
as
[ 27 ]



J. TAKASAKI
since the Vedic Age 46). It was also the basic idea for the theory of the
oneness of Brahman and Atman in the philosophy of the Upanişads as
well as of the later Vedāntavāda 47). Rather, it is an inevitable character
for all systems which declare their philosophical standpoint as Monism.
And when Buddhism developed itself into Mahāyāna Buddhism, it
could not but take the appearance of Monism as a result of Absoluti-
zation of the Buddha, and approach the Upanișadic thinking in its
philosophy.
On the other hand absolutization of the Buddha made Mahāyāna
Buddhism more religious than Abhidharma Buddhism. Emphasis was
placed on the Buddha rather than the Dharma and effected the “ ekayāna’
theory of the Buddha. Among the 3 jewels, the jewel of the Buddha came
to be regarded as the only ultimate refuge. At the same time, the purpose
of religious practices was made to be the acquisition of the Buddhahood
rather than the Arhatship of Abhidharma Buddhism. And for explaining
the possibility of anyone's acquiring the Buddhahood, the Monistic philo-
sophy was used as the background.
In this last point lies the significance of the tathāgatagarbha theory
of this text. This theory is in one sense an inevitable result of the deve-
lopment of Mahāyānistic Monism in its religious expression. In relation to
the term tathāgatagarbha, the Absolute is often spoken of as the dharmakāya
of the tathāgata, which is characterized as āśrayaparivștti' (Revolution
of the basis, i. e. of the tathāgatagarbha) or jñānapti. In this characteri-
zation the process from cause to result is observed, and this process
is
understood as the removal (" visamyoga') of two kinds of obscuration, viz. of
knowable things (jñeya-āvaraņa) and of defilements (kleśa-ā.). Basically,
however, the stress lies on the purification of mind from the defilements,
observed in the use of terms such as samalā tathatā' and nirmalā
tathatā', 'vaimalyadhātu', viśuddhicittaprakſti' or by the definition of
tathāgata as “tathatā śuddhim āgatā', and of tathāgatagarbha as "sarva
kleśakośakoțigūdhas tathāgatagarbhaḥ'. Such terminology is characteristic
of this tathāgatagarbha theory compared with stress on jñānâpti in the
vijñānavāda as the ultimate goal 48).
In relation to the conception of the Absolute in 'ground' and 're-
sult' aspect, one thing to be noted here is the development of Buddhology.
Establishment of the Buddha as the Absolute under the name of dharma-
6
6
6
46)
e.g. Brhad. Up. vi-1-1: yo ha vai jyeștham ca śreștham ca veda, jyeșthaś ca-
śreșthaś ca svānām bhavati, etc.
sa yo ha vai tatparamam brahma veda brahmaîva bhavati'. (Mundaka Up. iii-2-9)
is regarded as one of the important authority for the Vedāntavāda.
48) See VI, § 2. (The Ratna, and the Vijñānavāda).
47) 6
[ 28 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
kāya subsequently caused another aspect of the Buddha to rise besides
the dharmakāya. This was originally a problem of how to treat the histo-
rical Buddha in the Buddhist doctrine. In comparison with the dharma-
kāya, this second body is called “rūpakāya' (v. II, 61). This division of two
bodies corresponds to the two aspects of the Absolute, namely, the rūpakāya
is 'result' and the dharmakāya is ‘ground' for the second body. Also,
it corresponds to the division of two satyas, paramārtha and samvști,
the former being lokottara and the latter being laukika, and called
'paramārthakāya’ and samuſtikāya, (v. III, 1). Furthermore these two
are said to represent svârthasampatti’ and “parârthasampatti', respe-
ctively (v. III, 1).
This double kāya theory is, however, immediately followed by the
triple kāya theory, by dividing the second one into two. An usual nomina-
tion for the three is svābhāvika', “sâmbhogika’ and “nairmāņika’, respecti-
vely (vv. I, 151–2; II, 43 ff.). Of them, “svābhāvika’ is for the dharmakāya,
the fact of being the Buddha's own nature. Here, the Buddha's own
nature means, as has been observed above, bodhi' or 'buddhajñāna,' and
hence the dharmakāya's original character as 'result’ is still retained.
That is why, in this text, buddhajñāna’ is replaced by dharmakāya without
interpretation (v. I, 27 and 28), and dharmakāya is called svârthasampatti
because of its including jñānâpti within itself. On the other hand, ósām.
bogika' and nairmāņika’ are of conventional character, referring respec-
tively to the body for the assembly of Bodhisattvas and to the body for
common people in order to lead them towards the Enlightenment. There-
fore, these latter two are called parârthasampatti. Here, sāmbhogika
means para-sâmbhogika, i. e. the Body for other's enjoyment. Literally
sambhoga means enjoyment or bliss of the dharma by the Buddha himself
as the 'result' of realization of dharma, but by this term all the Buddhas
in ten directions and in three divisions of time, i. e. past, future and
present are signified, and the manifestation of these Buddhas is regarded
as for the sake of people, and is hence included under parârthasampatti. In
turn, the historical Buddha is defined as nairmāņika’, the Apparitio-
nal Body.
This triple kāya theory seems to be basic for the Ratna. However,
the interpretation of sambhogika leaves some doubt with us. Why is its
function limited to para-sambhoga ? If the dharmakāya is regarded as
svârthasampatti, it is to be called “svasambhogika' in contrast with the
sāmbhogika which represents parârthasampatti. It may be more logical
to include the dharmakāya's character of jñānâpti or svârthasampatti
into the second body of sambhoga, and by it, to leave the dharmakāya
in its pure character of truth or reality.
[ 29 ]



J. TAKASAKI
6
6
In this respect, attention should be paid to the division of dharmakāya
by the commentator into 'muktikāya' and ' dharmakāya ’ in regard to its
function (v. II, 21). These two kāyas correspond to 'prakſtiviśuddhi'
and 'vaimalyaviśuddhi' (p. 80), or to "prakſtisthagotra' and ' samudāni-
tagotra' (v. I, 149), respectively. Here, the muktikāya is to be identified
with the Absolute Essence characterized as dharmadhātu', cittaprakſti '
or “prakſtisthagotra’, in the sense 'the Body which represents the innate
liberation ’. Being 'innate', it stands for the “ground' aspect of the
dharmakāya. In turn, the dharmakāya stands for the result' aspect,
since it is nothing but the samudānītagotra being the result produced by the
prakſtisthagotra (v. I, 150). Shall we then consider that the svârthasam-
patti is represented by this second body, the dharmakāya, and the first body,
the muktikāya remains without arthasampatti ? An answer is not clearly
given in the text, but it is apparently 'no'. Namely, the said twofold
Body is referred to as the substratum of sva-parârthasampatti, which is
caused by means of avikalpajñāna' and tatprsthalabdha-jñāna '(v. II, 30).
In this description, the correspondence between each of the 3 couples of
terms is not clearly observed, but it may be proven in the light of another
commentary passage.
Commenting on the dharmakāya as one of the svabhāvatraya of the
tathāgatagarbha (p. 70), the commentator divides the dharmakāya into (1)
dharmadhātu which, being the realm of avikalpajñāna, represents ' adhiga-
madharma', and (2) tadnişyanda', i. e. the natural outflow of dharmadhātu,
which constitutes' deśanādharma' characterized as parasattveșu vijñapti-
prabhavaḥ '. Here the text does not call the latter the realm of prsthala-
bdha-jñāna, but it might well have done so, in contrast with the former,
which it calls the realm of avikalpajñāna'; and in the same way, the for-
mer might be said to represent svârthasampatti, in comparison with the
latter, which is characterized as 'parasattveșu vijñaptiprabhavaḥ'. Thus
being the case, svârthasampatti is to be regarded as inherent to the
muktikāya or dharmadhātu, and we may conclude that the complete
separation of the result' aspect from the dharmakāya is not observed
in the Ratna., even in the commentary 49).
49) In Mahāyāna Buddhism, Buddhology occupies an important part among its
doctrines. The development had taken place from the double kāya theory in Nāgārjuna's
philosophy to the triple kāya theory as in the Ratna., and lastly resulted in another kind
of the triple kāya theory, whose characteristic lies in the division of the dharmakāya into
two kāyas, or separation of the jñāna from the attributes of the dharmakāya. In Chinese
Buddhism reference is often made to these two kinds of the triple kāya theory calling the
former • K'ai-ying-ho-chên ( A ) and the latter "K’ai-chên-ho-ying
( A ) , r respectively. It is one of keynotes to decide the date of Mahā-
[ 30 ]



The Ratna gotravibhā g a
There is another thing to be noticed here with reference to the aspects
of the dharmakāya. Up to now I have often referred to the result’ aspect
without distinction. But in regard to its contents or its relation to 'cause'
or “ground', there is a certain variety. The terms which show this va-
riety and which are used in the Ratna. are visamyoga', nisyanda ' and
' vipāka'. Of them, the first one, visamyoga-phala is used for characteriz-
ing āśrayaparivștti, or dharmakāya as the result of purification or attain-
ment of Enlightenment (p. 80, 82). This is nothing but what I called the
result ’aspect of the dharmakāya whose cause ’ is gotra or dhātu, i. e. the
tathāgatagarbha. On the other hand, the term nişyanda is used for indicating
the relation of dharmaratna and samgharatna to buddharatna (dharmatā-
nisyanda, p. 7) or the relation of deśanādharma to adhigamadharma as
mentioned above (dharmadhātu-nisyanda). This last usage actually refers
to the relation of the rūpakāya to the dharmakāya in the sense that the
rupakāya is merely an aspect of the dharmakāya when it works for parârtha.
The same relation must be observed between samudānītagotra and the
twofold rūpakāya (v. I, 150), and between avikalpajñāna and tatp?sha-
labdha-jñāna. In this case, the dharmakāya appears in its "ground'
aspect.
Now the third one, vipāka-phala is an entirely different one from the
other two in its original character. Namely, in the case of visamyoga, cause
and result are exactly the same, and in the case of nisyanda, result is the
same as cause or is involved within the cause, while in the case of vipāka,
cause and result are dissimilar from each other. In the Ratna, however,
this term is used along with visamyoga in the same context as dharmakāya
and rūpakāya (v. II, 1). Namely, samvștikāya, representing parârtha,
is said to be vipāka-phala, in contrast with paramārthakāya as visamyoga-
phala which represents svârtha. This usage seems to relate to the character
of sambhogakāya as the reward’ of infinite practice (bhāvanā) before
Enlightenment. If it were so, Enlightenment or jñānâpti may also be ter-
med vipäkaphala because of its character of svasambhoga, while to include
the nirmāņakāya within vipäkaphala is improper; what is proper
the nirmāņakāya is the term nișyanda, because this kāya is said to be the
incarnation of the dharmakāya 50).
6
to
yāna Sūtras and Šāstras. About Buddhology of the triple kāya, see D.T. Suzuki, Studies
in the Larkāvatāra Sūtra, pp. 308 ff.
50) In the Lankāvatārasūtra (p. 283, 1.4 & 11), the term vaipākika is used for
sāmbhogika, in contrast with nairmāņika (see BHS Dic.) (c. # #W). At the
same time, however, the term nisyanda-buddha is mentioned as indicating the second
Body (p. 56, 1. 8 & 18, 57, 1. 8), which, curiously enough, is rendered into the Chinese
[ 31 ]



J. TAKASAKI
IV.
GENEALOGY OF THE TATHĀGATAGARBHA THEORY
§ 1. - Sources of the Ratnagotravibhāga.
In the preceding chapter, we have examined the fundamental character
of the tathāgatagarbha theory in the Ratna. which seems to be the first
treatise exposing this theory systematically and in its pure form. For
its explanation, however, the Ratna. has been much aided by various
scriptures which expound the same theory. Sometimes it presents the
whole passage by quotations without its own words, sometimes it uses the
scriptural passage as if it were its own words without any sign of quotation.
The number of Scriptures utilized in the Ratna. is more than 20 and quo-
tations or altered scriptural passages seem to occupy more than one third
of the whole text. In one sense, the Ratna. seems merely a collection
of scriptural passages concerning the tathāgatagarbha theory.
Among the scriptures utilized in the Ratna. 51), those relating to
the Kārikā text and hence assuming important roles in the arrangement
of the text are, according to the commentator, following ones:
1) Dhāraṇīśvararājasūtra (or Tathāgatamahākaruņāsūtra), from which
the 7 Vajrapadas are derived as the body of the treatise. (v. 1, 2 dhā-
raņìrājasūtra).
2) Tathāgatagarbhasūtra, from which the 9 examples illustrating
how the Germ is covered with defilements are derived (p. 66.18. tathāgata-
garbhasūtrôdāharaṇanirdeśa) (Chapter I).
3) Ratnadārikāsūtra, from which the 64 Attributes of the Buddha
are derived (v. III, 27. ratnasūtra) (Chap. III).
4) Jñānâlokālankārasūtra, from which the 9 examples illustrating
the Buddha's Acts are derived (v. IV, 79).
Of them, the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra is the most important one as it
expounds mainly the tathāgatagarbha theory, and its essential doctrine
constitutes the core of this text.
Besides the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra, the main sources of the Ratna.
and those frequently quoted are 5) Āryaśrīmālāsūtra and 6) Anūnatvâpūrņa-
tvanirdesaparivarta. Also, 7) Avatamsakasūtra (Tathāgatôtpattisambhava-
51) Bibliographical information of these scriptures is given in my notes on the English
translation under the first occurrence of quotations or name of each scripture.
[ 32 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
parivarta), 8) Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra (Mahāyāna) (Tathāgatadhātuparivarta),
9) Sāgaramatiparipṛcchā, 10) Gaganagañjābodhisattvaparipṛcchā, and 11)
Ratnacūdasūtra are quoted, not often but with long passages. They
expound more or less the same theory of tathāgatagarbha, and especially
nos. 5) 6) and 8) are the representative scriptures on this theory.
There are two works, among the quotations, which occupy a unique
position in comparison with the former group of Scriptures. They are 12)
Mahāyānâbhidharmasūtra and 13) Mahāyānasūtrâlankāra, both of which
are regarded as the main authorities on the Vijñānavāda. However, the
Ratna. utilized them only along the lines of the tathāgatagarbha theory
and never referred to the Vijñānavāda. These two seem to hold a key
for solving the problems of the relationship between the tathāgatagarbha
theory and the Vijñānavāda, as well as of the authorship of the Ratna.
One remarkable point is that all scriptures or parts of scriptures men-
tioned above are unknown to Nāgārjuna or, at least, not used in the works
of Nāgārjuna. They seem to have appeared after Nāgārjuna, and the
tathāgatagarbha theory, like the Vijñānavāda, is an entirely new and later
theory of Mahāyāna Buddhism.
Besides these scriptures on the tathāgatagarbha theory, the names
Prajñāpāramitāsūtra and Saddharmapuņdarīka, two main and basic scrip-
tures of Mahāyāna Buddhism, are mentioned in the Ratna. There is no
quotation from the Saddharmapundarīka, but it is clear that this scripture
had influenced the Ratna. much with its ekayāna theory and the doctrine
of the eternal Buddha. As for the Prajñāpāramitā, besides its indirect
influences on the Tathāgatagarbha theory, the Ratna. quotes once from 14)
Vajracchedikā and once from 15) Astasāhasrikā altering the sentences
into the commentary's own form. This last one is significant in its expo-
sition of how phenomena are originated from one essence (ekadhātu), as
well as in its ascription of the cause to irregular thought (ayoniśo-manasi-
kāra) 52), which corresponds to the passage, v. 1, 52 onwards, in the Ratna.
Other quotations are from 16) Dşdhâdhyāśayaparivarta, 17) Tathā-
gatagunajñānâcintyavişayâvatāranirdeśa, 18) Kāśyapaparivarta (Ratnakü-
țasūtra), 19) Şadāyatanasūtra (or Şaļindriyarāsi-sūtra) and from more
than eight unknown sources, of which one is in Prakrit.
To discuss and examine the character of all the scriptures mentioned
above is beyond our present purpose, but it is necessary and possible for
clarifying the tathāgatagarbha theory to trace its genealogy back to its
origin by examining these sources. For this purpose, we will pick up
some important ones and will refer to their historical order.
52) See my note on the Engl. tr. (III–53).
[ 33 ]



J. TAKASAKI
§ 2. - Cittaprakſti and Āgantukaklesa
As has been said above, the most important and principal point of
the tathāgatagarbha theory is to purify the mind. This is not an exclusive
facture of this theory, but was also the principle of practice from the out-
set of Buddhism. The peculiarity of the tathāgatagarbha theory lies in its
emphasis on this point in association with the fundamental identification
of living beings with the Buddha under the name of tathāgatagarbha, etc.
The term tathāgatagarbha was an entirely new usage but its basic idea is
found in the expression “ prakſtiprabhāsvaram cittam āgantukair upakle-
śair upakliśyate.", for which the same corresponding expression, or si-
milar ones, are used sometimes in the Pāli canons 53). Another expression of
this same idea of purification of mind, cittasamkleśāt sattvāḥ samkliśyante,
cittavyavadānād viśuddhyante”, seems also to be old and to have its
origin in the Pāli canons 54). This purity of the innate mind is often com-
pared to that of gold 55). A Prakrit verse quoted in the Ratna. (p. 6)
seems to belong to the same line of doctrine found in the Pali canons,
though it is not traced in the present Tripitaka. The Dhāraṇīśvararājasūtra
together with the Sāgaramatiparipịcchā, the Ratnadārikā, the Ratnacūda,
the Gaganagañjā, the Akşayamati-paripṛcchā, etc., which form parts of
the Mahāsamghātasutra 56), are also standing fundamentally on the theory
of the cittaprakſti, and they are probably written by one and the same
group who later developed the tathāgatagarbha theory.
Characterization of defilements or phenomena in general as acciden-
tal’ attachment on the mind is, however, not found among those scriptures
belonging to the oldest group in the Pāli canon and there was a controversy
about this characterization among schools of the Abhidharma Buddhism 57).
53)
54)
55)
e.g. AN, I, 5, 9-10 (PTS, vol. 1, p. 10).
e.g. SN (PTS, vol. 3, p. 151).
e.g. AN (ibid., vol. 1, p. 257); SN (vol. 5, p. 92).
*ti**. Taisho, No. 397 (Vol. 13). Compilation of this
big collection of sūtras in the present form has probably taken place after the composition
of the Ratna.
57) The Sarvāstivāda did not accept this theory of cittapraksti. Among other sects
of the Abhidharma Buddhism, the following four are known for their acceptance of this
theory:
1) the Theravāda of Ceylon-Dhammapadâtthakathā, 1; 2; 3; Milindapanhā iv-7--2.
2) the Vaibháşika Mahāvibhāṣāśāstra (Taisho, 27, p. 140 b).
3) the Vātsīputrīya-* Śāriputrâbhidharmaśāstra (Taisho, 28, p. 697 b).
4) the Mahāsaņghika— * Lakşaņânusāraśāstra (it) (Taisho, 32,
p. 163 b), etc.
See C. Akanuma: Bukkyō-kyōri no Kenkyū (Japanese) (Studies in the Buddhist
Doctrine), p. 210 ff.
[ 34 ]



The Rat na gotravibhāga
This idea had been fully accepted by the Mahāyāna Buddhism, and we
can find a frequent use of the above two expressions among the Mahāyā-
nistic scriptures. Furthermore, this characterization of defilements led
to the idea of non-reality of all the phenomena and resulted in the citta-
mātra theory, whose first exposition is found in the Daśabhūmikasūtra 58).
This Ratna., though it makes no use of the term cittamātra, is no doubt
based upon this theory, which will be observed in the passage expounding
the origination of phenomena from the cittaprakſti.
Questions which arise pursuant to the idea of cittaprakſti and ägan-
tukakleśa are (1) why and how the phenomena of unreal character are ori-
ginated and (2) how the cittaprakſti is pure and identical with the Buddha
or the immutable Absolute being. The tathāgatagarbha theory seems to
put the accent on the latter of the two, and, as for the former it has not
sufficient explanation to resolve the problem even in the Ratna. It
describes only how the defilements come to cover the pure innate mind
and how they are to be removed. The first exposition of these two points
(consequently the first establishment of the tathāgatagarbha theory) is seen
in the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra.
§ 3. - "Buddhajñāna” in the Avatamsaka.
Prior to the establishment of the tathāgatagarbha theory by the Tathā-
gatagarbhasūtra, there is a stage of development with respect to the iden-
tification of living beings with the Buddha. It is the idea of the pene-
tration of the Buddha's Wisdom into the living beings described in the
Avatamsakasūtra and quoted in the Ratna. (pp. 22-24). The Avatamsa-
kasūtra as is seen in the present form is a collection of minor scriptures
among which the Dasabhūmika, the Gandavyūha are important and of
early origin. The passage containing the description of the buddhajñāna
(Tathāgatôtpattisambhavanirdeśa) also seems old, and was translated early
in the 3rd cent. A.D. into Chinese by Dharmarakṣa as an independent
Sūtra 59). The term buddhajñāna is a synonym of buddhatva or buddhatā,
58) The source of the citta-mātra theory is often sought for in the following passage:
tasyaîvam bhavati / cittamātram idam yad idam traidhātukam / yāny apîmāni dvādaśān-
gāni tathāgatena prabhedaśo vyākhyātāni tāny api sarvāṇy eva cittasamāśritāni !! (Rahder's
ed. p. 49 c, Taisho 9, p. 558 b).
Strictly speaking, however, this passage teaches only the dependence of the pheno-
mena on the citta. Still there is no doubt that the citta-mātra theory and the Vijñānavāda
have their starting point in this passage.
59) • Ju-lai-hsing-hsien-ching (kn * ALL, Taisho, no. 291.
[ 35 ]
4



J. TAKASAKI
because the Buddha's nature is represented by his Enlightenment, for which
the acquisition of jñāna is indispensable. This buddhajñāna is often com-
pared to the sun, as it appears from the Ratna, or the Jñānâlokâlankāra.
In their emphasis of buddhajñāna, the Jñānâlokálankāra and the Tathāgata-
gunajñānâcintyavişayâvatāra seem to be consistent with the Tathāgatôtpa-
tisambhavanirdeśa. These scriptures expound on one hand the eternity
of the Buddha and his acts which corresponds to the all-pervadingness
of the buddhajñāna and form the basic idea of the Absolute 60).
§ 4. - The Tathāgatagarbhasūtra.
The Tathāgatagarbhasūtra is a small scripture whose main part con-
sists merely of the 9 examples illustrating the covering of defilements over
the tathāgatagarbha. The core of its doctrine is stated in the following
four sentences in the first example, a Buddha sitting in the interior of
every lotus flower:
1) I (the Buddha) observe, with the buddhacakṣus, that all living
beings, though they are among the defilements of hatred, anger and
ignorance, have the buddhajñāna, buddhacakṣus, and buddhakāya sitting
motionless.
2) [Thus] all living beings, though they are abiding in various
worlds with bodies full of defilements, are possessed of the tathāgatagarbha
which is always unpolluted and, being endowed with the virtuous proper-
ties, they are not different from myself.
3) Having thus observed, the Buddha preached the doctrine in
order to remove the defilements and manifest the Buddha nature [within
the living beings].
4) eşā dharmānām dharmatā. utpādās vā tathāgatānām anutpādād
Đã sadaimaite sattvas tathagatagarbhah 61).
60) On the relationship between the Tathāgatôtpattisambhavanirdeśa and the Ratna.
with respect to the Tathāgatgarbhasūtra, with special reference to this idea of the pene-
tration of buddhajñāna, I wrote an article in the Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies:
“ The Tathāgatôtpattisambhavanirdeśa of the Avatamsaka and the Ratnagotravibhāga,
with special reference to the term tathāgatagotra-sambhava’ (KH * 2)", JIBS,
Vol. 7, No. 1, Tokyo, 1958, pp. (48)–(53). This article stresses the development of
the idea of 'gotrasambhava', one of the important terms in the Hua-yen philosophy
and locates the first use of this compound in the Ratna. (p. 26, ll. 8–9). In relation to
this, one thing to be noticed here is that a scriptural passage of unknown source quoted
in the Ratna. (p. 72, 11. 10-11) seems to belong to the same group as the two said scrip-
tures in the use of terms: tathāgatadhātur utpanno garbhagataḥ.
61) These four passages are in Taisho, 16, p. 457 b-c. The last one is quoted in the
Ratna. (p. 73).
[ 36 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhag a
The first three of those statements are based upon the Avantamsaka-
sūtra. but deepened the idea by the phrase "sarvasattvās tathāgatagarbhāḥ”
which probably was declared for the first time in this Sūtra, and they re-
present, respectively, what is called the three meanings of the tathāgata-
garbha by the Ratna., viz. dharmakāya-parispharaņârtha, tathatâvyatirekâr-
tha, and gotrasambhavârtha (p. 26, vv. I, 27, 28, & 11. 7-11). In the fourth
sentence, it is expounded how this tathāgatagarbha theory is an eternal truth.
That, in short, is the whole contents of this Sūtra. However, all of
these points form the basic idea of the tathāgatagarbha theory and are dee-
pened by the subsequent scriptures.
§ 5. - The Aryaśrīmālāsūtra.
A Sūtra which deeply investigates the characters of the tathāgatagarbha
in a more developed form than the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra and has a signifi-
cant role for establishing the tathāgatagarbha theory is the Āryaśrīmālā-
sūtra. It is quoted more often in the Ratna. than any other scripture, and
as far as the philosophical approach is concerned, it occupies a much more
important position in the Ratna. than does the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra.
The original points of thought of the tathāgatagarbha expounded in this
Sūtra are as follows:
1) Two faces of the mind: prakſtiparisuddhicitta and upakliștacitta.
(quotations in pp. 15 & 22) It is another expression of the same idea of
* cittaprakſti and ägantukakleśa', and because of this co-existence of purity
and impurity on the mind, the tathāgatagarbha has got its name and is
characterized, in the Ratna., as samalā tathatā?.
2) In relation to those faces, the so-called '5 meanings of garbha
(clarified in the Buddhagotraśāstra), i. e. tathāgatagarbha, dharmadhātu-
garbha, dharkāyagarbha, lokottaradharmagarbha, & prakſtiparisuddha-
garbha give the full characteristic of garbha on its pure side.
3) Union of the tathāgatagarbha with innumerable attributes of the
Buddha, which identifies the garbha with the dharmakāya, and in relation
to this,
4) the aśūnya and sūnya character of the garbha (Q in pp. 59 & 76).
The explanation for this is that garbha is śünya since it is devoid of klesas
which are of unreal nature, while garbha is aśūnya since it is endowed with
buddhadharmas which are inseparable from the dharmakāya which is the
reality.
Moreover, such an observation is regarded as the real conception of
śünyatā, and to know the tathāgatagarbha is said to be the same as to know
śūnyatā. Here is seen the criticism on the sarva-śūnya-vāda, and those
[ 37 ]



J. TAKASAKI
adhering to the sūnya-vāda are criticized by being called • śūnyatāvikșipta-
cittā' sattvāḥ. 62).
5) Such criticism of the sūnyavāda naturally leads the Sūtra to de-
scribe the dharmakāya, as well as the garbha, with positive expressions
and thereby the character of the dharmakāya or garbha approaches the
Ātman of the Vedāntavāda. One of such expressions is the tathāgata's
possession of 4 guņapāramitās of nitya, sukha, ātman and śubha. Also
4 attributes of nitya, dhruva, śiva and śāśvata are used for the dharmakāya.
(Q. in pp. 12, 55 & 84). At the same time, the Sūtra contends that
the garbha identical with the dharmakāya of such characters is not the
Ātman mentioned by the tirthās 63).
6) Another expression of the idea of the sūnya and aśūnya of the
garbha is its being the support (ādhāra) of both the samklista- and vyava-
dāna-dharmas, or of samsāra and nirvāṇa (Q. in p. 72). The latter point,
i. e. the garbha's being adhāra of pure dharmas, is proved by its being en-
dowed with buddhadarmas and its being considered the ground of having
intention towards the Nirvāṇa (Q. in pp. 35 & 73); while the former has
the simple explanation that the samsāra exists owing to the existence of
the garbha which is beginningless (anādikālika). (cf. the Ratna. p. 72)
But it does not give any account of how and why such samsāra or unreal
defilements come out and cover over the garbha. In another place, the
Sūtra seeks for the basis of origination of defilements in avidyāvāsabhūmi
(Q. in p. 33) which is also regarded as being anādikālika; but its research
never goes beyond this, and the problem remains unsolved.
7) Lastly, the fundamental standpoint throughout this Sūtra is
the ekayāna theory, i. e. the acceptance of One Vehicle of the Buddha, i. e.
the Mahāyāna inclusive of the other two Vehicles of Srāvaka and Pratyeka-
buddha. It consequently admits the Nirvāṇa only to the Buddha (Q. in
p. 57), accepts the buddharatna as the ultimate refuge among 3 jewels,
(Q. in pp. 7, 9, & 20), and declares that the tathāgatagarbha is only accessi-
ble to the Buddha or those who believe in the buddhayāna. And to realize
this ekayāna is said to acquire the anuttarasamyaksambodhi, that, is nirva-
ņadhātu, or to become tathāgata, in another word, to realize the dharma-
kāya, which is nothing but the extreme of the ekayāna ? 64).
Thus we
62) Cf. Introduction, VI, § 1.
63) Taisho, 12, p. 222 b.
64) Ibid., p. 220 c.
This extreme of the ekayāna’ is translated into Chinese by
terms · Chiu-ching-i-ch'eng - ) which is identical with the Chinese
title of the Ratna. According to the Tibetan translation, its original word seems to be
ekayānanişthā'. (T. theg-pa-gcig-gi mthaḥ). However the idea of the Chinese title
of the Ratna. is probably taken from this term.
[ 38 ]



The Ratnag otra vi h hāg a
know that the Ratna. depends to a great extent on this Sūtra for its fun-
damental standpoints and that quite a little of its original development is
added to this Sūtra.
§ 6. - The Anūnatvâpürņatvanirdeśa and the Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra.
There is a small Sūtra contemporary with the śrīmālāsūtra named
Anūnatvâpūrņatvanirdeśa 65). The main point of its doctrine is the non-
increase and non-decrease of the dharmadhātu, the Universe, and consequen-
tly the full identification of the sattvadhātu with the dharmakāya of the
Buddha. In most passages, it has similar terms as the Śrīmālāsūtra with
respect to the dharmakāya, to its possession of innumerous dharmas or
guņas, to the tathāgatagarbha's being covered with kleśas and to its accessi-
bility only to the Buddha. Special contributions of this Sūtra to the Ratna.
are 1) inseparability of the dharmakāya and the Buddha's dharmas ex-
plained by similes of lantern and gems (cf. Q. in p. 39), 2) fixation of 4 terms
of nitya, dhruva, śiva and śāśvata as the 4 attributes of the dharmakāya
(Q. in pp. 12 & 54), and 3) three divisions of the dharmakāya under the
names of sattvadhātu, bodhisattva and tathāgata (Q. in p. 41) 66),
About the perception of the garbha as identical with the dharmadhātu,
the Sūtra ascribes it to the removal of dualistic views of various kinds, esp.
of increase and decrease with respect to the sattvadhātu as well as the dhar-
madhātu or nirvāṇadhātu, and those who have such dual-conception are
called, in the Sūtra, “ icchantika' (Q. in p. 28). There is however no de-
scription of the non-possibility of acquiring Buddhahood on the part of
the icchantikas as discussed in the Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra (of Mahāyāna) 67).
The Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra, which exposes the eternity of the dharma-
kāya of the Buddha from the standpoint of the Mahāyāna and borrows
a term
65) In one point this Sūtra seems older than the Śrimālāsūtra, namely in the use of
avinirmuktajñāna’, which is abbreviated in the latter to amuktajñāna' or
amuktajña'. See my note on the Engl. tr., 1-23.
66) In addition, the following fact is to be noted here. The Sūtra has a pas-
sage explaining the characteristics of tathāgatagarbha in three points (AAN, p. 476 b),
namely: 1) anādisāmnidhya-sambaddhasvabhāva-subhadharmatā (# Te I MEX
W), 2) anādisāmnidhyâsambaddhasvabhāva-kleſakośată be
& Me Tit), and 3) aparântakoțisama-dhruvadharmată-samvidya-
mānatā # KE #). Referring to them, the Ratna. says
that no. 3 is explained thruogh the 10 meanings of tathāgatagarbha, whille nos. 1 & 2 are to
be explained by the 9 illustrations on the defilements covering the garbha (S. p. 59 11-14).
67) This work is quite a different one from the Mahāparinirvaņasūtra ed. by
E. Waldschmidt which is a Sanskrit equivalent for the Pāli Mahāparinibbānasuttantu.
[ 39 ]



J. TAKASAKI
its style of structure from the Mahāparinibbānasuttanta of Primitive
Buddhism, seems to have completed its present form in days a little
later than those of the Srimālā and the Anūnatvâpūrņatvanirdeśa 68).
As for its tathāgatagarbha theory, there can hardly be found any new and
advanced doctrine, but its description is detailed in several points. It
describes the eternity of the dharmakāya by attributing the 4 gunaparami-
tās of nitya, sukha, ātman and ſubba as the result of the double negation
of misconception (viparyāsa) as the Śrīmālā did but, is enriched by detail
with similes (Q. in p. 74) and applies to the tathāgatagarbha the term
ātman 69), which was a sort of taboo among early Buddhists. It may
be called a unique point of this Sūtra.
Another point to be noted here is the doctrine of the icchantikas. The
sūtra, as one exposition of the garbha theory, emphasizes the innate posses-
sion of the buddhadhātu in every living being, but on the other hand, it refers
often to the icchantikas who being agotra have absolutely no possibility of
attaining Buddhahood. Such descriptions are sometimes contradicted
in various passages, but the final solution of this problem seems to be
the denial of the existence of such people from the ultimate point of view
through introducing the idea of the Bodhisattva’s compassion or the idea
of the long time needed before their achieving Buddhahood. The Ratna.
utilizes this second idea and construes the theory of icchantikas as a conven-
tional teaching to convert people (p. 37). Some Mahāyānists, however,
attributed the final agotratva to those icchantikas who abuse the Mahāyāna
doctrine. Such an opinion is often found in the works belonging to the
Vijñānavāda. The Sūtrâlankāra, and the Lankāvatāra, while exposing
the doctrine of tathāgatagarbha on one hand, have on the other the same
opinion on this problem as the Vijñānavāda. It is one of key points for
distinguishing the pure tathāgatagarbha theory from the Vijñānavāda.
§ 7. - The Mahāyānasūtrâlankāra.
The Sūtrâlankāra is the only Šāstra quoted in the Ratna.. It is said
to be a work of Maitreya with a commentary by Vasubandhu; consisting of
68) It is at least sure that the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra is known to the author of the
Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra. See, for example, Taisho, Vol. 12, p. 881 b: A * *
UJJ etj 1 # t .... (Tib. de-bshin-gśegs-paại
sñin-pohi mdo-sde chen-po, Peking Ed. KJ. Mdo. Tu. 97 a 6 (Photo. repr. Vol. 31,
p. 185). This version (Taisho, No. 367), tr. by Fa-hien in 418 A. D., is regarded as the
oldest version of the MPS.
89) Taisho, 12, p. 407 b. where the simile of gold hidden under the ground (Cf. The
Ratna. vv. I, 112-114) is spoken of.
[ 40 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhā ga
6
6
6
21 chapters, it describes the practices of the Mahāyānistic Bodhisattvas.
The division of chapters has a resemblance to the chapters of the Bodhi-
sattvabhūmi in the Yogâcārabhūmiśāstra, attributed, according to the
Chinese tradition, to the same author. It expounds mainly the theory of
the Vijñānavāda, but at the same time has passages referring to the ta-
thāgatagarbha as seen in the quotations in the Ratna.
Including one verse preserved only in the Chinese version 70), all of the
three verses of this Šāstra quoted in the Ratna. are found in Chapter IX,
the chapter on "bodhi'. This chapter, treating the subject of buddhatva
has a doctrine quite similar to the Ratna. In this chapter we come across
such terms and subjects as buddhatvasya śaraṇatva ’, ‘āśrayaparāvștti’,
āśrayaparivștti’, “anābhogâpraśrabdhakriyā' with the simile of the Di-
vine drum, anāsravadhātu ’, “dharmadhātuviśuddhi’, “tathatā”,
tathatā”, “tathā-
gatagarbha’, and the “trikāya’-theory of 'svābhāvika’, “sâmbhogya', and
nairmāņika', with all of which we are acquainted in the Ratna. As for the
garbha theory, however, this Šāstra has no development to compare with the
Sūtras referred to above, nor has any systematization on it. The term
tathāgatagarbha is used only once throughout the passages, although this
Šāstra seems to accept basically the theory of the prakſtiprabhāsvarată of
citta and ägantukaklesa. Rather, it is inclined to approach the trisvabhāva
theory in its interpretation of cittaprakſti, which it regards as the same as
parinispanņa-svabhāva. This point may be called unique in this Šāstra
as showing a germ of reciprocal influence between the garbha theory and
the Vijñānavāda.
In relation to this, one notable thing is the use of the term “āśrayapa-
rāvstti' or ' -parivstti’ and its meaning. In the orthodox Vijñānavāda,
the term āśrayaparāvštti or āśrayasya parāvștti is used for denoting the
anāsravadhātu, and aśraya means alayavijñāna, while in the Ratna., the
term āśrayaparivſtti is used for characterizing dharmakāya or bodhi, and
āśraya means tathāgatagarbha or gotra 71). What is meant by aśrayapa-
rāvstti and what is meant by aśrayaparivștti are finally the same Absolute,
and the difference lies in what is meant by āśraya. This much is clear in
regard to the difference between the two theories. But whether parāvștti
and parivștti differ from each other in their sense is somehow questionable.
As if to answer this question, the Sūtrâlankāra has various relevant passages.
1) 6 verses beginning with v. 12 in Chap. IX are said to be referring
āśrayaparāvſtti'. Of them, in v. 12 we have“ buddhatvam āśraya-
to
70) After p. 31, 1. 15 nairātmyameva ātmani kṛtvā. See note on the Engl. tr. VIII-
(III & IV)–32.
71) An exception is found once in v. V, 7, where, instead of 'parivștti', 'parāvítti'
is used.
[ 41 ]



J. TAKASAKI
6
syânyathāptiḥ'. Here ' anyathāpti’seems to be an interpretation of
rāvștti ’, in the sense, change of basis from A to B’.
2) The commentary says that by this v. 12, āśrayaparivítti' is
explained.
3) Commenting on v. 13, the commentator says that by this second
verse the superiority of the tathāgata abiding in that state (sthitaś ca tasmin
sa tathāgato, v. 13) over other kinds of āśrayaparāvštti is explained.
4) V. 14 refers to the 10 meanings or characters of āśrayaparāvštti
and says "āśrayo... tathāgatānām parivșttir isyate'. It is interpreted by the
commentator as 'aśraya iti yo sau parivítty aśrayas tam darśayati' (that
which is parivſtti is that which is āśraya.) Here the term āśraya seems to be
synonymous with buddhatva as “sarvagatâtmaka’ (v. 14). This last point is
shown in v. 15 with a simile of sky, which is quoted in the Ratna. (p. 71)
5) Verses IX, 41-48, referring to 'vibhutva', speak to the effect that,
due to parāvýtti of 5 indriyas and others, one obtains ' vibhutva' (power)
and enters upon the amalâśraya of the Buddhas.
6) The same amalâśraya is explained in v. IX, 77 to be the dharma-
kāya, which is, in turn, defined as āśrayaparāvštti-lakṣaṇa ' in the com-
mentary on v. IX, 60.
7) In the commentary on vv. XI, 32–33, which refer to the investi-
gation of samkleśa and vyavadāna, the commentator says that what is
taught in v. 33 is the acquisition of alambanaviseșa (special basis), i. e.
dharmâlambana, which causes the disappearance of the manifestation of
dvaya, i. e. grāhya and grāhaka, as the result of fixation(yoga) of mind on
svadhātu, i. e. tathatā; and that the one who has acquired this state is called
' parāvýttâśraya' (one whose āśraya has been changed).
8) In the commentary on v. 42 of the same chapter, which refers
to the yogabhūmi' of Bodhisattvas, the commentator mentions ' āśraya
as the last of the 5 yogabhūmis and explains that 'āśraya' means here
āśrayaparāvștti’. But v. 42 mentions only the first 4 and the 5th
bhūmi, i. e. āśraya is shown in the next verse where it is referred to by the
term āryagotra characterized as vimala, sama, viſista, and anyūnânadhika.
9) v. XI, 44 runs as follows:
padārtha-deha-nirbhāsa-parāvșttir anāsravaḥ
dhātur, bījaparāvștteḥ sa ca sarvatragâśrayaḥ ||
2
6
and thereon the commentary says that “ bījaparāvítti' means
bījaparāvſtti' means “ alayavij-
ñānaparāvștti '; 'parāvștti' of 'padârtha-deha-nirbhāsa', i. e. of vijñā-
nas (other than ālayavijñāna) is the “ anāsravadhātu’, i. e. the “ vimukti”.
It (=anāsravadhātu) is also sarvatragasraya', i. e. existing also in
the śrāvaka and the pratyekabuddha.
[ 42 ]



The Rat na gotra vibhāg a
10) The same parāvștti of vijñānas are referred to in the next
verse (v. 45) with another expression, “āvſtti’ of manas, udgraha and vi-
kalpa, and this “ āvſtti’ is explained in the commentary to mean parāvștti.
11) In chapter XIV, v. 29 says that āśrayaparāvștti takes place
for the first time in the first Stage of Bodhisattva, and vv. 45 & 46 say
that the final āśrayaparāvștti, i. e. the acquisition of anuttarapada and
sarvâkarajñatā takes place with those Bodhisattvas who practised the
vajropama-samādhi.
12) v. IX, 49 runs as follows:
pratistha-bhoga-bījam hi nimittam bandhanasya hi
sāśrayāś cittacaitās tu badhyante 'tra sabījakāḥ ||
For the second line, the commentary says: on these three nimittas are bound
citta-caittā accompanied by āśrayas. Furthermore the āśrayas' are
here to be understood as cakṣurvijñāna, etc., i. e. the 5 outer-sense-based
vijñānas.
13) v. XIX, 54 runs as follows:
akhyāna-khyānatā jñey, asadartha-sadarthayoh
āśrayasya parāvșttir mokso sau kāmacārataḥ //
Here aśrayaparāvștti is defined as the non-manifestation of the unreal
objects (asadartha = nimitta, in v. 49) and the manifestation of the reality
(sadartha = tathatā).
That is the description of aśrayaparävstti in the Sūtrâlankära. In
conclusion, we may say, though it is not brought out clearly by the author,
that there is a variety in usage of the term āśraya:
1) āśraya (in pl.) = cakşurvijñāna, etc.
2) āśraya = bīja ālayavijñāna (whose parāvștti, i. e. anyathậpti
is buddhatva), and
3) āśraya = āśrayaparāvștti tathāgatānām parivștti sarva-
tragasraya = amalâśraya == anāsravadhātu = dharmakāya buddhatva
āryagotra svadhātu.
-
This use of the term āśraya relates to the characterization of svābhā-
vika or dharmakāya as the āśraya of the other two kāyas (IX, 60, 66). In
this third meaning, āśraya should be compounded only with parivștti, and
not with parāvștti, because parāvștti means "change of basis (from A to B) ';
and as the result of parāvștti, the former basis, being the substratum
of unreal things or phenomena, is annihilated or no more exists (akhyāna of
asadartha), while at the same time there takes place the manifestation
[ 43 ]



J. TAKASAKI
of the reality (khyāna of sadartha, i. e. tathatā) which is a new āśraya, and
it is this manifestation of the reality that is meant by parivștti 72).
This last interpretation of āśraya and its combination with parivſtti
is supported by the usage of these terms in the Yogācārabhūmi, including
the Bodhisattvabhūmi, and the Dharmadharmatāvibhāga attributed to
Maitreya. In these two Śāstras, we find āśraya in combination with pari-
vſt, but not with parāvst, with such expressions as — dauşthulyasya pra-
hāņad āśrayo • sya bodhisattvasya parivartate', 'asyâśyayaḥ parivștto bha-
vati, să câsya niruttarā āśrayaparivșttih' (Bodhisattvabhāmi); '- yoginām
parivșttâśrayānām sarvaklistadharma-nirbīja āśrayaḥ parivartate' (Yogācā-
rabhūmi, II Manobhūmi); “(āśrayaparivștter) svabhāvapraveśas tathatā-
vaimalyam āgantukamala-tathatâprakhyāna-prakhyānāya', 'tathatā-pari-
vȚtti ’, etc. (Dharmadh) 73). On the other hand, not only is the term āśraya-
parāvștti found in the Sūtrâlamkāra, but also in the Vijñaptimātratā-trim-
śikā, Sthiramati's commentary on the Madhyântavibhāga, the Lankāva-
tārasūtra, etc.; and the Mahāyānasamgraha of Asanga has probably the
same use of āśrayaparāvștti along with its definition 74).
These facts seem to show that the term āśrayaparāvștti was used for
the first time in the Sūtrâlamkāra (kārikā) and has gradually been fixed as
a technical term of the Vijñānavāda by Asanga and Vasubandhu, defining
āśraya as ālayavijñāna, and that before that term was introduced, the term
āśrayaparivítti was commonly used by the Vijñānavādins and in the Ta-
thāgatagarbha theory.
The commentator of the Ratna. was no doubt acquainted with both
expressions--parivștti and parāvſtti—but the Ratna. could not employ
the latter expression, because gotra, being āśraya, could remain before
and after the enlightenment without changing its nature.
This supposition bears upon the authorship of the Ratna., and due
72)6
Parāvștti’ is interpreted in three ways in the Sūtrâlankāra. Namely, 1) anya-
thâpti (in literal sense); 2) akhyāna, astam prayātam, nirasyate, etc., disappearance, to
disappear (phenomenal sense); 3) āvștti, returning (doctrinal sense). The most important
one is the third interpretation, that is to say, the disappearance of the asad-artha (inclusive
of bija) signifies its returning to the reality. In this sense, āśrayaparāvștti’ means
āśrayasya bijasya tathatāyām amalâśraye parāvrttiḥ'. And as the result of the “parāvștti'
into “tathatā”, “tathatā' alone manifests itself fully without obscuration, that is to say,
tathatāyāḥ parivíttiḥ' takes place.
73) Bodhisattvabhūmi, Wogihara's edition, p. 368, 1. 6; p. 405, 11. 25–26; Yogācārabhū-
mi, ed. by V. Bhattacharya, Part 1, p. 27, ll. 1-2; Dharmadharmatāvibhāga, fragments,
Appendix to the Mahāyāyasūtrâlankāra, ed. by S. Lévi, p. 190, 11. 6 & 9, respectively.
74) Mahāyānasamgraha, Tib. Sde-dge edition, Ri 36 b 2: gshan-gyur-pa ni, gan
gshan-gyi dban-gi no-bo-ñid de-ñid-kyi gñen-po skyes-na, gan kun-nas ñon-mons-pași
chal dog cin, rnam-par byan-baḥi char gyur-paḥo. (gshan-gyur-pa parāvștti).
[ 44 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
to the specialized use of the term āśrayaparivștti, the commentator of the
Ratna. must be someone other than Asanga or Vasubandhu 75).
V.
THE WONKS ON THE TATHĀGATAGARBHA THEORY CONTEMPORARY
WITH OR SUCCEEDING THE RATNAGOTRAVIBHAGA
There are many other works on the garbha theory which are never ref-
fered to in the Ratna. though regarded as of Indian origin and preserved
in the Chinese and the Tibetan Tripitakas. Among them those to be re-
ferred to here are (1) Dharmadhātvavićeşaśāstra, (2) Buddhagotraśāstra, (3)
Anuttarâśrayasūtra, (4) Lankāvatārasūtra and (5) Mahāyānaśraddhôtpādaśā-
tra. Except (4), all these are known only through the Chinese sources, that
casts various problems about their authorship, date, and even their origina-
lity, and these problems are relating to the date and author of the Ratna.
Especially, the first three are in close relation to the Ratna. in their con-
tents, and hence discussions will be mainly devoted to them in this chapter.
§ 1. - The Mahāyānadharmadhātvavićeşaśāstra.
As has been referred to above, this small Šāstra is attributed to Sāramati
in the Chinese Tripițaka. From its contents, this work seems quite con-
sistent with the Ratna. The main point of doctrine in this work is the
'bodhicitta' which is synonymous with “cittaprakſti’ in the Ratna. and
hence is nothing but the tathāgatagarbha. The text describes this bodhicitta
under 12 divisions, namely: 1) phala, 2) hetu, 3) svabhāva, 4) paryāya,
5) abheda, 6) avasthāprabheda, 7) asamklista, 8) nitya, 9) yoga, 10) anartha-
kriya, 11) arthakriya, and 12) ekatva (or ekadhātu), and is mainly based
upon two Sūtras, the Āryaśrīmālā and the Anūnatvāpārņatvanirdeśa 76).
75) The Chinese insertion of one verse from the Sūtrâl. referred to above is accompanied
by a prose commentary whose explanation is exactly the same as Vasubandhu's comment-
ary on this very verse. This fact cannot be a fully reliable proof for the present problem
but suggests the point to some extent. There is another point which shows the close
relationship between the Mahāyānasūtrālankāra and the Ratna. It is the use of the six
categories (sal-padârtha) beginning with svabhāva. As for this, see Appendix III, The
Description of the Ultimate Reality.
76) These terms are reconstructed from the Chinese translation which gives the
following terms: 1) R, 2), 3) , 4) * , 5) THE X 5, 6)
f (t), 7) THE PH, 8) , 9) #, 10) Ti VE FIJ, 11) PE *
FUJ, 12) — 2
[ 45 )



J. TAKASAKI
6
This division has a resemblance not only in its terminology but also
in its contents to the 10 meanings of the gotra described in Chap. I of
the Ratna. (pp. 26 ff.). In particular, 6) avasthāprabheda is fully identical
with that in the Ratna. in its classification of living beings into “sattva-
dhātu', bodhisattva', and 'tathāgata' seeking for its authority in the
Anūnatvâpürnatvanirdeśa. Besides, under 1) phala, the text says phala
means nirvāṇadhātu which is nothing but the dharmakāya characterized as
āśrayaparivștti, and explains it in the same way as the Ratna. did in its
explanation on the śuddhâvasthāyām avikārârtha ([IX]-c). Under 2)
hetu, it explains 4 causes, i. e. dharmadhimukti, prajñā, samādhi and ka-
ruņā, with a verse containing the same idea as v. 1, 34 of the Ratna.
Under 3) svabhāva, prakſtyasamklistatva is said to be the own nature of
bodhicitta. In 4) paryāya, a synonym of bodhicitta in its phala state, is
called śubhâtmasukhanityapāramitā and so authorized by a quotation
from the Śrīmālāsūtra. The verse in 8) nitya, is identical with verses I,
53 & 54 of the Ratna. in its contents, explaining that dharmadhātu is, like
ākāśadhātu, of neither origination nor destruction (anutpădânirodha).
Under 9) yoga, the text has two verses, of which the first one is identical
with v. 1, 42-cd of the Ratna., the second, with I, 155, a verse referring
to the śünya and aśūnya of the gotra. And lastly, the contents of 12)
ekatva are the same as those under "asambheda' (X) in the Ratna., saying
that the bodhicitta is nothing but the dharmakāya, the tathāgata,
the āryasatya or the Nirvāṇa, and emphasizing oneness of nirvāṇa with
buddhatva.
The remaining parts not described above seem to be taken mostly from
Chapters II & IV of the Ratna. Namely, a reference to the 2 sides of
bodhicitta under 3) svabhāva, saying “ śukladharmamayalaksaņa and vaima-
lyaparisuddhilakṣaṇa reminds us of the characterization of dharmakāya
with prakſtiviśudhi and vaimalyaviếuddhi (p. 80) or the distinction of
prakſtisthagotra and samudānītagotra in the Ratna.; a verse under 7) asam-
klista resembles v. II, 3 in the Ratna.; similes used under 10) anarthakriyā
and II) arthakriyā are the same as those in Chapters 1 (among 9 illustra-
tions), II, and IV of the Ratna.; and the 10 characteristics of asambheda
under 5) can be traced one by one in various passages in the Ratna.
Thus examining the contents, we may say that the author of this text
composed it on the basis of the Ratna., compressing and revising the form
according to his own view. In this case, as this text, unlike the Sūtralan-
kāra, seems to have been written from the same standpoint as the commen-
tator of the Ratna., it is possible that the latter is identical with the author
of this text, and Sāramati to whom this work is attributed may have been
the author of the commentary of the Ratna.
[ 46 ]



The Ratna gotra vibh ag a
§ 2. - The Buddhagotraśāstra.
The Buddhagotraśāstra is another work which,
work which, like the Dharma-
dhātvaviśeşaśāstra, expounds the 10 meanings of the gotra described in the
Ratna. but with the same terminology and with explanations much similar
to those of the Dharmadhātvaviseşaśāstra. It is translated into Chi-
nese by Paramârtha, is attributed, according to the Chinese tradition,
to Vasubandhu 77) and highly esteemed among Chinese Buddhists throu-
ghout the centuries as a representative work on the garbha theory. This
attribution is rather doubtful, but this work poses interesting problems
for us because of its very close similarity to the Ratna. in most parts
of the text.
The whole text consists of 4 chapters, of which the last one treats
the subject of the 10 meanings of the gotra under the title: Analysis of the
characteristics (laksaņa) (of the Tathāgatagarbha). Explanations under each
' lakṣaṇa’ are in most cases quite equivalent to those in the Ratna. even
in their wording, but sometimes doctrines based upon the Vijñānavāda are
interwoven among passages, and sometimes those passages which are in
other chapters or other parts of Chap. I in the Ratna. are inserted be-
tween lines.
The main differences between the two works as mentioned in the pre-
vious paragraph are as follows: 1) 9 illustrations of the garbha taken from
the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra along with the explanations of the 9 kinds of
defilements and of the 3 svabhāvas of the gotra (Ratna. pp. 66–72) are
inserted under (IX) avikāra, 2) (V) yoga includes explanations of dharma-
ratna' and 'sangharatna' which appeared in Chap. I of the Ratna., 3)
descriptions regarding Buddhology of the trikāya-theory which is taught
in two places in the Ratna., viz. in Chap. II (under (VI) vſtti) and in Chap. I
(among explanations on the 3 svabhāvas of the gotra, p. 72), are inserted
under (IX) avikāra; 4) explanations of (VII) nitya and (VIII) acintya in
Chap. II of the Ratna. are inserted under (IX) avikāra as characteristics
of the dharmakāya; 5) descriptions of the “ śünya and aśūnya’ of the garbha
along with the 4 kinds of sattvas, satkāyadſstipatitā, etc. are inserted in (X)
asambheda.
Besides those insertions in the passages on the 10 lakṣaṇas of the
garbha, important changes of arrangement in this work are 6) shift of the
'deśanāprayojana' which is at the end of Chap. I in the Ratna. to the
beginning of the work forming the nidānaparivarta’ (Chap. I), and 7)
») Taisho, No. 1610, • ' by #l', tr. by. I *.
[ 47 ]



J. TAKASAKI
shift of the explanation of the 3 meanings of the term tathāgatagarbha to
Chapter III with detailed explanation. These two points show that the
purpose of this text is to describe the buddhagotra only from its gotra aspect
but not from 4 aspects as in the Ratna. This relates to the fact that the
text is lacking those passages on the 4 aspects of gotra (Ratna. pp. 21-23)
and Chaps. III-V of the Ratna.
Throughout these passages, the text is written in prose except for a
few verses which are quotations. An interesting fact is that among these
quoted verses, we have 3 which are identical with vv. I, 51, 154 & 155 of
the Ratna, and one identical with v. IX, 23 of the Sūtrâlankāra which is
preserved in the parallel passage in the Chinese version of the Ratna.
For these, except for the first one, the name of the source is not mentioned,
and the first one is said to be taken from the Sandhinirmocanasūtra, though
the verse is not found in any edition of that Sūtra. Why such a statement
is made is not clear 78), but there is no doubt about their being taken from
the Ratna. along with its prose commentary. Another point of interest
is the use of the Anuttarâśrayasūtra in the Buddhagotraśāstra, as an autho-
rity, which is never quoted in the Ratna. It also indicates that this work
was composed after the Ratna.
Thus examining, we are led to imagine that, as far as the garbha theory
is concerned, this work was composed by borrowing many sentences from
the Ratna. but arranging them more systematically by adding the author's
own opinion. This author's opinion appears in descriptions of the '5
dosas' and the '5 guņas ’ in relation to the purpose of the teaching; of
the 5 meanings of the garbha taken from the Srimālāsūtra; of the 3 natures
of the garbha taught in (I) svabhāva; of the attainment of the Buddhahood
by the icchantikas (in [IV] karman); of the aśrayaparivſtti, dharmakāya,
and nirvāņa (in [V] yoga); of the 6 meanings of avikāra; of the '5 laksa-
ņas and 5 guņas' of dharmakāya as one of trikāya (in [IX] avikāra), etc.
These passages show the more developed doctrines, some of which are
based upon the Vijñānavāda. Furthermore, in passages other than those
referred to above, the text expresses the doctrines of the Vijñānavāda such
as “3-fold niņsvabhāva 3-fold svabhāva' and '5-dharmas', for which
the source is probably the Yogācārabhūmiśāstra.
Thus the Buddhagotraśāstra is based upon two works, the Ratna, and
9
78) The Ratna. has a similar character of being ‘ sandhi-nirmocana’ in its position
among the Mahāyāna Buddhism. (See Introduction, VIS 1 & 2). So it is not impossible
to imagine that the Ratna. is also called • Sandhinirmocana'. According to Prof.
Tsukinowa's information, one Tibetan version of the Ratna. has a subtitle: Sandhimo-
cana Mahāyāna-uttara-śāstra. (K. Tsukinowa, “On the Uttaratantra”, Japanese,
Annals of the Nihon Bukkyogaku-kyõkai, vol. 7, 1935).
[ 48 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
the Yogācārabhūmiśāstra, being a work on the garbha theory and the
Vijñānavāda, respectively, and trying to combine both theories. This
standpoint is somewhat similar to that of the Sūtrâlankāra and hence the
author was probably a Vijñānavādin who had a tendency similar to that of
Vasubandhu. As far as this point is concerned, the Chinese attribution of
this text to Vasubandhu seems quite reasonable, but a doubt arises about
its date because of its being later than the Ratna. which quotes the Sūtrâlan-
kāra. Furthermore we have to put the Anūttarâśrayasūtra between the
Ratna. and the Buddhagotraśāstra. To solve this problem, we should
next examine the Anuttarâśrayasūtra 79).
$ 3. - The Anuttarâśrayasūtra.
At a glance, one may notice in this Sūtra, a similarity of its chapter
divisions to those of the Ratna. Leaving aside the first and the last
two chapters which form its introduction and conclusion, respectively 80),
the central part of this Sūtra consists of 4 chapters whose titles are II.
Tathāgatadhātu-parivarta, III. Tathāgatabodhi-p., IV. Tathāgataguna-p.
and V. Tathāgatakriyā-p., respectively 81). These are quite identical with
the 4 aspects of gotra described in the Ratna. The term anuttarâśraya
seems to mean the Tathāgata that possesses these 4 aspects. Furthermore,
at the end of each chapter, the Sūtra emphasizes the inconceivability of
these 4 subjects, but their description can be traced word by word in the
82)
79) For these problems on the Buddhagotraśāstra discussed above, see M. Hattori,
“ Busshoron no Ichi--kosatsu” (Japanese), Bukkyoshigaku, vol. IV, p. 160 ff. 1955.
80) The original of Chap. I. is the Adbhutasūtra whose versions are available in
Tibetan and Chinese as well (Tib. Tohoku. No. 319; Taisho, Nos. 688, 689), and whose
main subject is the admiration of merits of the Stūpa worship as the highest observance of
Buddhists, while Chap. VII is a kind of eulogy on the Buddha (buddhastotra) and Chap.
VIII Parindana-parivarta is an enlargement of the conclusion of the Adbhutasūtra in
accordance with enlargement of the central part. The connection of the tathāgatagarbha
theory with the Stūpa worship and the eulogy on the Buddha is not a merely mechanical
and accidental connection at all, but it shows the existence of an essential interrelation
among them. Namely, the Stūpa worship and the eulogy on the Buddha had originally
taken place among a group of Buddhist from which the Mahāyānist community came into
existence, and the core of the tathāgatagarbha theory lies in its ekayāna theory, i.e. the
pure’ faith in the Buddha as often referred to in the Ratna.
81) In Chinese, ku * , #teni, ki 3* Th nit, & ko
* $respectively.
82) This term is restored from the Chinese FILE E #.
[ 49 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Ratna. in its prose commentary on v. I, 23 & 24 83). This fact does not
show that the Ratna. imitated the structure of this Sūtra or borrowed such
an idea from this Sūtra, but quite to the contrary, it seems to show that this
Sūtra was composed after the Ratna. as a kind of sutralization of the latter.
This hypothesis will be proven upon examining the contents of the Sūtra.
This Sūtra uses a categorization with respect to the characteristics of
gotra or dhātu, similar to that in the Ratna., but under the chapter on
bodhi. Its ten divisions are (1) svabhāva, (2) hetu, (3) paripantha, (4)
phala, (5) karman, (6) yoga, (7) vștti, (8) nitya, (9) āveņika and (10) acintya.
This is actually a mixture of the 10 meanings of 'gotra' and the 8 meanings
of “bodhi’ in the Ratna. Namely, (2)–(4) are identical with (II) hetu
and (III) phala among the 10 meanings of 'gotra' in the Ratna., of which
(3) paripantha is included under (III) phala in case of the Ratna., while
the last six (nos. 5–10), except for (9) äveņika, are identical with the last
five subjects among the 8 meanings of bodhi' in the Ratna. Although (9)
āveņika has no equivalent passage in the Ratna., its idea is taught here
and there. However, in the explanation of (1) svabhāva, whose idea is
fundamentally identical with (I) svabhāva of “ bodhi' in the Ratna, the
Sūtra refers to “āśrayaparivșitti’ with its 4 characteristics which are not
in the Ratna. but utilized in the Buddhagotra 84). On the other hand,
the six subjects starting with (V) yoga among the 10 meanings of 'gotra'
in the Ratna., are included in the chapter on tathāgatadhātu in this Sūtra
but with a slight difference in arrangement and wording. As to Chap. IV.
Tathāgataguņa-parivarta, the Sūtra mentions the 180 āveņikadharmas in-
cluding the 80 anuvyañjanas which are not in the Ratna., but names for
the 32 mahāpuruṣalaksaņas are identical with those mentioned in the Ratna.
It is only the chapter on Tathāgatakriya that differs entirely from the Ratna.
in its contents.
Besides these similarities with the Ratna., a stronger factor which
shows that this Sūtra is an imitation of the Ratna. is that this Sūtra refers
to certain passages which are quotations from other Sūtras in the Ratna.
as if they were its own sentences. For instance:
(Chap. II)
1. A passage on the meaning of gotra being sadāyatanavisesa ta-
ken from the Şadāyatanasūtra (Taisho 16 p. 469 b, RGV, p. 55, 16-17);
2. a passage on anutpādānirodhatā of the Tathāgata taken from the
Jñānālokālańkārasūtra (p. 469 RGV.
p.
12, 6-10);
C,
83) Ratna. 21.17-18, 22.5, 22.8–9, 24.9–25.3, Anuttarâśraya Taisho 16, 470C,
473 c, 475 c, 4766-c, respectively.
84) SHE E # , Taisho, 16, p. 470 c; 0 Pro, Taisho, 31, p. 801 b,
[50]



The Ratna gotravibhā ga
3. a passage on dharmakāya endowed with the Buddha's properties
which are avinirbhāga, amuktajña, acintya, etc. taken from the Srimālāsū-
tra (p. 469 6, RGV. p. 12, 10–14);
4. a simile of the Vaidūrya stone taken from the Sāgaramatipari-
prcchā (p. 469 6, RGY. p. 49, 5–9);
5. a passage on cittaprakſti and ägantukakleśa taken from the same
Sūtra (p. 4696-c; RGV. pp. 49, 9–50,7);
6. a passage on the 3 states of dhātu (avasthāprabheda) taken from
the Anănatta purnatvanirdeka (. 469 c; RGV. pp. 40, 16–41,5);
7. a passage on the penetration of tathāgatajñāna into the living
beings taken from the Tathāgatôpattisambhavanirdeśa of the Avatamsaka
(c. 470 a; RGV. p. 24, 2–6, 1–2);
8. a description of the Buddha, his teaching and disciples, being
an authority for the Triple Jewel taken from the Dhāraṇīśvararājasūtra
(p. 470 a; RGV. p. 3, 18);
9. a parable of a householder with respect to the Bodhisattva's
compassion taken from the Sāgaramatiparipṛcchā (p. 470 a-b; RGV.
pp. 47, 7–48, 13);
10. a passage on dhātu being āśraya of all dharmas, real and unreal,
taken from the Srimālāsūtra (p. 470 b; RGV. p. 73,2-5);
11. a passage on the inconceivability of dhātu taken from the same
Sūtra (p. 470 c; RGV. p. 22,1–4);
(Chap. III)
12. a passage on tathāgatagarbha covered with millions of defile-
ments taken from the śrīmālāsūtra (p. 470 c; RGV. p. 79, 10);
13. a passage on the Icchantikas taken from the Anūnatvâpūrņatva-
nirde<a (p. 471 4; RGY. p. 28,3–4);
14. a passage on those who are proud of their conception of śūnyatā
taken from the Kāśyapaparivarta (p. 471 b; RGV. p. 28, 11-12);
15. a passage on the 4 guņapāramitās (śubha, ātma, sukha, nitya)
taken from the Śrīmālāsūtra (p. 471 c, 472 a; RGV. pp. 30,19–31,16);
16. a passage on the 3 epithets of the Tathāgata, viz. dharmadhā-
tuparama, ākāśadhātuparyavasāna, and aparāntakoţinistha taken from the
Dasabhumikasutra (p. 472 a; RGV. P. 32,8–9);
(Chap. V)
17. a passage on the inconceivability of tathāgatakriyā taken from
the Dharanistararājasutra (. 476 by RGV. pp. 26,16–27,3).
Thus, the Anuttarâśrayasūtra is clearly a composition based upon the
Ratna. reshaping its contents into the frame of sūtra style and keeping
its stress on the bodhi aspect, which is the highest basis (anuttarâśraya).
[51]
5



J. TAKASAKI
But what was the intention of the author in composing this ‘Sūtra’? This
Sūtra is quoted only in the Buddhagotra, and both are translated into
Chinese by Paramârtha 85). A key to solve this question as well as the
question of the aụthor of the Buddhagotra seems to lie in the hands of Para-
mârtha. If we may surmise so, it was probably some one in the circle to
which Paramârtha had belonged or rather Paramârtha himself who compo-
sed these Sūtra and Šāstra as authorities for the propagation of his unique
doctrine, a combination of the garbha theory and the Vijñānavāda. This
supposition will be supported by the fact that among Chinese translations
of the Mahāyānasamgrahabhāsya of Vasubandhu, the garbha theory is
inserted only in Paramârtha's translation 86). Attribution of the Buddha-
gotra to Vasubandhu will be a subsidiary proof of the fact that the Ratna.
was not written by Asanga or Vasubandhu; the latter was a great and
respected scholar of the Vijñānavāda, and hence it was not desirable for
the Vijñānavādins to use the Ratna. as an authority.
Of course, the combination of both theories was already traced in the
Sūtrâlankāra to some extent, but it was not intentional nor as clear, and
the Ratna. seems to have tried to purify its standpoint on the garbha
theory, while the orthodox Vijñānavādins like Vasubandhu have gradually
deepened their theory on the side of pure Vijñānavāda. It was after Va-
subandhu that the combination again took place, but intentionally. As
AAS, p.
86) Quotations of the Anuttarâśraya in the Buddhagotraśāstra are as follows:
1) p. 801 e lu đE E 6 6 6 B...)= AAS, p. 469 = RGV, p. 12,6
(a part of a quotation from the Jñānālokālaňkārasūtra);
2) p. 806 b ( THE E H ...) = AĀS, p. 469 c = RGV, pp. 40,
16-41.5 (a quotation from the Anūnatvāpūrņatvanirdeśa);
3) p. 806 b (RP 1 E H ...) = AĀS, p. 469 c = RGV, p. 41,
13-15 (a commentary passage);
4) p. 812 (A E E # ...)
469 6 RGV, p. 55,
16-17 (a quotation from the Șadāyatanasūtra).
Paramārtha's translation of the Mahāyānasamgraha-bhāșya of Vasubandhu (Tai-
sho, No. 1595) also quotes the AĀS (Vol. 31, pp. 259 c-260 a AĀS, p. 469 b-c
RGV, pp. 49, 11-50, 7, a quotation from the Sāgaramati-pariprcchā). But the quota-
tion is found neither in the Tibetan version nor in Hsüan-chuang's translation of the
More interesting is the fact that the quotation is much more similar to the
Ratna. than to the Anuttarâśraya, which has, in turn, some insertion between lines.
86) For example, while interpreting a verse from the Mahāyāna-abhidharmasūtra
(Anādikāliko dhātuḥ) which is quoted also in the Ratna., Paramârtha's translation
gives two meanings for ' dhātu '. One is •ālayavijñāna' and the other is 'gotra’, i.e.
tathāgatagarbha (Taisho, 31, p. 156 c). The latter interpretation is identical with the
Ratna. (77.13–73.8).
same text.
[ 52 ]



The Ratnagotra vibhāga
other examples of this combination we have two works, the Lankāvatā.
rasūtra and the Mahāyānaśraddhôtpādaśāstra.
$ 4.
The Lankāvatāra and the Mahāyānaśraddhôtpāda-śāstra.
The unique point of these two works with respect to the garbha theory
is their identification of the tathāgatagarbha with the alayavijñāna- an
identification which has never been seen in previous works, even in those
of Vasubandhu. That is why the Lankāvatāra is regarded by modern
scholars as a work produced after Vasubandhu. The Lankāvatāra is
actually a collection of various theories among Mahāyāna Buddhism,
among which the garbha theory, and the Vijñānavāda are prominent,
and these two are combined under the theory of cittamātra taught in the
Avatamsaka. Later Vijñānavādins regarded the Lankāvatāra as one of
the authorities, but in China it was respected by the followers of the
Avatamsaka school as well, because of its exposition of the cittamātra and
garbha theory. This is quite significant for determing the fate of the garbha
theory, to which we will refer at the end of this introduction.
This is another Sūtra not known to the Ratna., and it was translated for
the first time into Chinese in 433 A.D. 87). Therefore, the date of the Ratna.
cannot be placed after that year and probably lies in the 4th cent. A.D.
As for the Sraddhôtpādaśāstra, its doctrine is purely of the garbha
theory in spite of its use of the term ālayavijñāna, and it is in one sense
the most systematic exposition of its kind. One point of similarity to
the Ratna. is the expression of faith in the Buddha Amitāyus towards the
end of the treatise. Another point which seems to be under the influence
of the Ratna. is its establishment of tathatā as the ultimate principle that
is the basis of both klista and aklista elements. It reminds us of the samalā
tathatā and nirmalā tathatā of the Ratna.
However, there is some doubt about its authorship. It is attributed
to Ašvaghoșa, the famous poet contemporary with the King Kanişka.
It is impossible that such an old poet is the author of this work containing
such a new theory. Some scholars wanted to solve this contradiction by
regarding the author as another Ašvaghoşa different from the famous poet,
but some are trying to prove that this work is of Chinese origin in the
absence of Sanskrit and Tibetan versions. This latter opinion is not
87) According to old Chinese Catalogues on the Tripitaka, (prior to this translation)
there was said to have been another translation done by Dharmakşema (TE)
between 412-433 A.D. but now missing. As far as the present problem is concerned,
there is no difference even if we accept this tradition.
( 53 )



J. TAKASAKI
untenable since, being translated by Paramârtha, this work is in the same
position as the Buddhagotra. There is no work which refers to this trea-
tise in Indian literature. But one difficulty in accepting this opinion is
how to explain the existence of two versions of this treatise in China. The
second translation was made by Sikşānanda who is said to have come from
Khotan. The problem is still under consideration, but it is at least sure
that this work shows the final development of the garbha theory 88),
VI.
THE POSITION OF THE RATNA. IN MAHĀYANA BUDDHISM
§ 1. - The Ratna. as a Criticism on the Prajñāpāramitā.
6
At the end of Chapter I., the Ratna. expresses its purpose of discourse,
saying that the text was exposed in order to establish the existence (astitva)
of buddhadhātu so that one could avoid the faults created by the theory
of “ śünyam sarvam described in the previous' Sūtras (I, 158–9).
It is clear that the Sūtras which expose the theory of “ śünyam sar-
vam' with similes of megha, svapna, etc. signify the Prajñāpāramitā and
the like, and that, in contrast with the Prajñāpāramitā taken as the
‘pūrva 'exposition, this Ratna. calls itself the uttara-tantra', the later
exposition. Namely, the subtitle: Uttaratantra denotes the position of the
Ratna. in the history of Mahāyāna Buddhism in the sense one that co-
mes after the Prajñāpāramitā, criticizing the latter."
On what point does then the Ratna. criticize the Prajñāpāramitā ?
As a matter of terminology, the Ratna. emphasizes “asti’ in contrast
with the • śūnya’ of the Prajñāpāramitā. But this asti-vāda' does not
mean the negation of “śūnya-vāda’. Rather, the Ratna. regards itself
as the real successor to the “ śünya-vāda’ of the Prajñāpāramitā declaring
that the real meaning of 'śūnyatā' is to know the 'astitva’ of the Germ
having within itself both the “ śünya’ of defilements and the “aśūnya’ of
88) There is another Sūtra which exposes the garbha theory and bears a resemblance
to the Ratna. in its contents. Its name, according to the Tibetan version, is Ārya-
candrôttaradārikā-vyākarana (Tohoku no. 191) and it was translated into Chinese in 591
A.D. (Taisho, 14, no. 480) Its composition seems to be later in date than the Ratna. and
there were probably a great deal of influences from the Ratna. See N. Takata, On the
Āryacandrottaradārikāvyākaraṇa-nāma-mahāyāna-sūtra (Japanese). Journal of Indian
and Buddhist Studies (Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyü) Vol. V, No. 1, 1957 (pp. 83-86).
As I received this information only recently, detailed examination of this Sūtra could not
be pursued up to now.
[ 54 ]



The Rat nag otra vibh ag a
as
the Buddha 's Qualities. (I, 154–5). We may take this statement as an
explanation of 'śünyam sarvam’, defining “ sarvam sarvakleśa' from
which all phenomena arise and which excludes the Germ inseparably asso-
ciated with the Buddha's Qualities, that is to say, identical with the Ab-
solute; and hence the word śünya' implies aśūnya’ of this Germ.
As the Prajñāpāramitā was lacking in a clear explanation of such a kind,
the Ratna. assumes for that reason many faults among the followers of the
Prajñāpāramitā, and, therefore, the aim of the Ratna. is to remove such
faults in order to make known the real meaning of ' śünya-vāda ’.
Thus the criticism is directed not to the doctrine of the Prajñāpāramitā
itself, but to its short or unclear explanation. This point becomes clear
after examining the 5 faults described in the Ratna., especially the last
three of them. Namely, the 3rd fault:' abhūtagrāha' denotes the ' Ātma-
vāda' of Heretics or the 6 sarvâstivāda' of the Abhidharma and is said
to be removed by “prajñā’. This is exactly what is aimed at by the
Prajñāpāramitā. However, when this "prajñā’ is stated to be the intui-
tion of ' śünyam sarvam’, many people are likely to misunderstand the
meaning of ' śūnya ’: on the one hand, some regard ‘ sūnya’ as something
substantial, on the other hand, some become the “nāstika’ and never
believe in the existence of the dharmakāya but rather abuse such a reality.
The text calls both kind of people those of 'śünyatāvikṣiptacitta' (P. 75).
The former have a kind of “abhūtagrāha’; the latter have the fault
of bhūtadharmapavāda', which forms the 4th of the 5 faults. As the
remedy against this fault, the commentary mentions “jñāna’. Here
“ jñāna' has the character of criticizing “ prajñā’ in the sense of affirming
the existence of the reality undone by 'prajñā'. But the text seems to
regard this 'jñāna’ as one side of 'prajñā', as a natural outflow of 'praj-
ñā'. In other words, “prajñā has two functions, to negate the “ abhūta-
grāha', and to establish the 'bhūtadharma', as represented by “prajñā'
and “ jñāna', respectively.
These two sides of 'prajñā' are shown in another passage by the terms
avikalpajñāna and tatprsthalabdha (jñāna), and characterized as lokottara
and laukika, respectively. Here the term ' laukika’ signifies the func-
tion of jñāna to make known the reality to the 'worldly' beings. This
is nothing but a function of providing benefits for others, i. e. for the world,
and hence is based upon the Compassion, karuņā or maitrī. Unless this
function of jñāna operates, man will have the fault of ' ātmasneha '. This
seems to be the reason for maintaining ‘ātmasneha' as the last of the 5
faults and maitri' as the remedy for it.
Thus the Ratna. emphasizes karuņā along with prajñā as associating
inseparably with each other for the acquisition of the Buddhahood. This
[ 55 ]



J. TAKASAKI
point is also mentioned in the explanation of the process from cause to
effect with respect to the Germ. (pp. 27–35) Namely, the text mentions
four kinds of practice, viz. adhimukti, prajñāpāramitā, samādhi, and ma-
hākaruņā, as the cause for attaining the dharmakāya. Of them, prajñā.
pāramitā and mahākaruņā are relevant to the present discussion. The
practice of prajñāpāramitā is said to be the remedy for all kinds of substan-
tial views, the ātmavāda of heretics and the like, while the practice of mahā-
karuņā is said to be the remedy for any selfishness whose typical form is
found in the Pratyekabuddha. Also, it is said that the result of the former
practice is the establishment of the dharmakāya to be the ' ātmapāramitā
extending as far as the limit of space (ākāśadhātu-paryavasāna), while that
of the latter is the establishment of the dharmakāya to be the ' nityapā-
ramitā' continuing as far as the limit of time (aparântakoţiniștha). And
the Bodhisattva is said to be the only one who practises both prajñā-
pāramitā and mahākaruņā and who, owing to the practice of prajñā, never
afflicts the world, but, owing to the practice of karuņā, never remains in
the Nirvāņa (apratisthitanirvāņa). Here we see the stress lies more on the
karuņā than on the prajñā and this standpoint relates to the ekayāna
theory whose origin is in the Saddharmapundarika, which declares the eter-
nity of the Buddha 89).
Another important point to be noted here is the positive expression
of the dharmakāya to be the śubha-ātma-sukha-nityagunaparamitā. These
four terms, viz. nitya, sukha, ātman and śubha are usually regarded as
wrong notions with respect to the phenomena, and most scriptures, inclu-
ding the Prajñāpāramitā, teach the notions of anitya, duḥkha, anātman and
aśubha as the correct view (aviparyāsa) with respect to the dharmas, i. e.
the phenomena. In contrast, in this Ratna. or in the garbha theory in
general, these prohibited terms are used as attributes of the dharmakāya
but in the reverse order. This is a kind of revolution in Buddhist thought,
but it is, as has been examined above, another expression of the same idea
of 'dhātvastitva’ being explained through the characters of the gotra as
' sūnya' and ' aśünya'. Special attention is to be paid to the point that
the ātmapāramitā is said to be the result of the practice of 'prajñāpāra-
mitā. In the Prajñāpāramitā, the function of prajñā (or prajñāpāramitā)
is to establish the correct notions of anitya, etc., while here the same term
is used for the function of establishing the dharmakāya expressed in the
positive way. It seems to show that the Ratna. understands the prajñā-
89)
e.g. Saddh. P. XV-1: Acintyā kalpasahasrakotyo yāsām pramāņam na kadāci
vidyate / prāptā mayā eșa tadagrabodhir dharmamca dećemy ahu nityakālam // (Bibl. Buddh.
ed. p. 323).
[ 56 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
paramitā in its two aspects, negation of the wrong view and manifestation
of the reality, in other words, prajñāpāramitā as consisting of prajñā
and jñāna or of prajñā and karuņā. In clarifying such a structure of
prajñāpāramitā, the Ratna. deserves to be called the successor to the
Prajñāpāramitā. What is criticized is 'prajñā, not accompanied by ka-
ruņā', or “prajñā which does not work out in the world as jñāna ’. 90).
§ 2. - The Ratna. and the Vijñānāvāda.
There is another system in Mahāyāna Buddhism that criticizes the
Prajñāpāramitā in a manner similar to the way done by the Ratna. This
is the Vijñānavāda whose authority is sought for in the Sandhinirmocana-
sūtra. The Sūtra says 91). By the first Turning of the Wheel of Doctrine,
there was taught the doctrine of the āryasatya and on its basis the astivāda
of the Abhidharma has been developed. This astivāda was negated by the
Prajñāpāramitā and there has been established the sūnyavāda of the Mahā-
90) Both terms, prajñā and jñāna are of a great significance in Buddhism since its
beginning. Literally and originally, the former has a somewhat functional character, while
the latter signifies what is attained by the former. Concretely speaking, prajñā is the
intellect or intuition by means of which the Buddha attained the bodhi, while jñāna is the
knowledge which forms the contents of bodhi. However, such an analysis was made for the
first time by Pāli Abhidhamma Buddhism, and in primitive Buddhism there seems to have
been no strict distinction in the use of these terms. This distinction is of fundamental
character throughout the history of Buddhism, but there was a variant in each school in
the usage of both terms. Diagramatically speaking, the Sarvāstivāda laid stress on jñāna
in which the function of prajñā is implied, while the Prajñāpāramitā emphasized prajñā as
the highest practice', but this prajñā included both aspects of jñāna and prajñā. In con-
trast with the logical approach of Abhidharma Buddhism, that of Mahāyāna Buddhism
may be characterized as ' practical'. This prajñā of the Prajñāpāramitā and consequently
of Nāgārjuna was again analyzed by the Vijñānavāda, as mentioned above, which, in turn,
sought for its basic term in jñāna as the Sarvāstivāda did. But a revolutionary point of
Mahāyāna Buddhism in comparison with Abhidharma Buddhism is in the emphasis laid
on ‘parārthasampatti', and hence on karuņā; and the Vijñānavāda, in spite of its simila-
rity to the Sarvāstivāda in its analytical method, is a successor of the Prajñāpāramitā in its
introduction of the idea of parârthasampatti into jñāna, which changed the character of
jñāna to its ground. A critical approach to this subject will be one of the big themes
in future studies of Buddhist thought. Cf. G. Sasaki, “ Prajñā and Jñāna ", (Japanese)
Journal of Indian & Buddhist Studies, Vol. II, No. 2. Tokyo, pp. 437–439.
91) Sandhinirmocanasūtra tr. by Hsüan-Chuang (Taisho, No. 676) Chap. V. Niḥs-
vabhāvalakṣaṇaparivarta, Taisho, 16, pp. 693 c-697 c. This statement is placed towards
the end of the chapter. Tib. ed. by E. Lamotte (1935), p. 85 f. (Chapitre VII, 30-31).
Sandhinirmocana’ on account of
on account of ‘niņsvabhāva' is the main topic of this chapter,
which opens with a question by Paramārthasamudayagata Bodhisattva (Tib. Don dam
yan-dag-ḥphags) on this point. (Lamotte, op. cit., p. 65 f.).
[ 57 ]



J. TAKASAKI
yana. The amalgamation of both asti- and sūnya-vāda is now done by the
Sandhinirmocana, and it is the last and the highest Turning of the Wheel
of Doctrine. As the justification for this statement, the Sūtra continues:
The ultimate doctrine of the Mahāyāna is no doubt taught in the Prajñā-
pāramitā, but its way of exposition is with an esoteric meaning, or " with
a hidden intention ’92). For example the Prajñāpāramitā teaches the
niņsvabhāvatā in regard to the sarvadharma, but what is meant by this
niņsvabhāvatā is not so clear. The purpose of the Sandhinirmocana is to
explain this meaning of niņsvabhāva “in a clear manner', that is to
say, to analyze and clarify the significance of the śünya-vada. Just be-
cause of this standpoint, the Sūtra is called ' sandhi-nirmocana ’, i.e. the
Disclosure of the Knot or Secret Doctrine. Along this line, the Sūtra
establishes the doctrine of the 3 meanings with respect to the niņsvabhāvatā
as the basis of the trisvabhāva theory 93).
This standpoint is precisely held in common with the Ratna. in its
criticism of the Prajñāpāramitā. Indeed, the Ratna. is in one sense a
sandhinirmocana on account of prajñā 94) and the Sāndhinirmocana may
be termed the uttaratantra as the ultimate exposition of the sūnyavāda
described from the two sides, of śünya and aśūnya.
Such a community of historical background brought the garbha theory
and the Vijñānavāda to assume a similar appearance of ' astivāda’ and to
have common doctrines to a great extent, and lastly resulted in the amal-
gamation of both theories. Avikalpajñāna and tatprsthalabdha (jñāna),
or āśrayaparivștti and the six categories beginning with svabhāva for
describing the ultimate reality, are, as has been referred to above, terms
borrowed by the Ratna. from the Vijñānavāda. The quotation of a verse
from the Mahāyāna-abhidharmasūtra (anādikāliko dhātuḥ-) also shows
the influence of the Vijñānavāda on the Ratna., at least on the commentary.
Also, we have already observed in the Sūtrâlankāra the co-existence of
the garbha theory and the doctrine of trisvabhāva and alayavijñāna.
In spite of such interrelations of both theories, the unique stand-
point of the Ratna. may be observed in the fact that there is no quotation
from the Sandhinirmocana, nor any use of terms like trisvabhāva or āla-
yavijñāna: hence, the Ratna. cannot be regarded as a work of the Vi-
jñānavada. Furthermore the Ratna. has many authorities for its doctrine
that are, in turn, not acquainted with the Vijñānavāda at all. These
facts seem to tell us that the garbha theory, although it criticizes the Prajñā-
92) Cf. Edgerton BHS Dic. S. v. samdhāya, & samdhā, samdhi.
93) Lamotte, op. cit., Chap. VII, 3 (p. 67). He refers to the source of this trisva-
bhāva in the Prajñāpāramitā (op. cit., Préface, pp. 14–16).
94) See Note on Introduction, V, 3.
[ 58 ]



The Rat na gotra vibhā g a
pāramitā, is a completely different system from the Vijñānavāda by
origin, and, in its possession of many Sūtras, somewhat precedes the
Vijñānavāda.
The starting point of the garbha theory lies in the doctrine of "citta-
prakſti and ägantukakleśa' and the stress is laid on the purification of the
mind which is regarded as the attainment of the Enlightenment. This
cittaprakſti is unconditionally identified with bodhi or dharmakāya and
is called · dhātu” or “gotra’. From such a theory of cittaprakſti, we may
expect the development of the cittamātra theory as exposed in the Avatam-
saka or the Lankâvatāra. In fact, we find a germ of such a theory in the
Ratna. in the passage where the origination of the 3 impurities (samklesa)
of klesa, karman and janman from cittaprakſti by the force of ' ayoniso-
manasikāra’ is set forth. Nevertheless, the Ratna. never uses the expression
of cittamātra. The passage referred to above is used for explaining how the
cittapraksti is real and how the ägantukaklesa is unreal, but there is no
explanation of the reason why such unreal klešas are originated from the
cittaprakſti. In other words, the emphasis lies on the identification of gotra
or garbha with the dharmakāya and any difference of the garbha or the
sattvadhātu from the dharmakāya is rather neglected. This is a weak point
of the garbha theory.
On the other hand, what is done by the Vijñānavāda is the investiga-
tion of this very point of difference between sattvadhātu and the Buddha.
When the Sandhinirmocana established the theory of trisvabhāva as the
result of the analysis of niņsvabhāvatā taught in the Prajñāparamitā, its ana-
lytical method found the origin of the nature of sattvadhātu covered with
kleśas in vijñāna as the function of distinguishing object from subject.
The term cittamātra is replaced by and explained more concretely as ' vij-
ñaptimātra ', and 'citta', not as pure cittaprakſti, but as something that
manifests klesa, or as the basis (āśraya) of phenomena, is named ' alayavi-
jñāna’. In its methodology, the Vijñānavāda was really a successor
of the Abhidharma Buddhism, but it was the Abhidharma based upon
the
śünyavāda of the Prajñāpāramitā, and hence deserves to be called “mahā-
yānâbhidharma’, as shown in the title of one scripture.
Thus the standpoint of the Vijñānavāda is the analysis of phenomena
from the viewpoint of the sattvadhātu and thereby it stands in a clear contrast
with the garbha theory which, in turn, exposes its doctrine always from
the viewpoint of the dharmakāya or bodhi. Of course, even for the Vijñā-
navāda, the ultimate purpose is the realization of bodhi, or manifestation
of the real meaning of sūnyatā. As regards bodhi, the Vijñānāvada seeks
for the process towards its realization in the acquisition of 'jñāna' as a
result of the conversion of ālayavijñāna, and with this “jñāna’ acquired,
[ 59 )



J. TAKASAKI
6
it is said, the 'vijñaptimātratā' can be understood, otherwise it cannot. Thus
this ‘jñāna’ is characterized as “ laukika
laukika’ pěsthalabdha', owing to which
function the basic prajñā, i. e. avikalpajñāna’ can realize itself in the
world. This point is accepted in the Ratna. The only difference, but of an
essential character, is that the gotra, being “anādikāliko dhātuḥ' and the
āśraya of sarvadharma', is regarded as fully identical with bodhi or dhar-
makāya, and “jñānâpti’ is said to be the perfect manifestation (pari-vștti)
of such āśraya', while in the Vijñānavāda, alayavijñāna, though being
anādikāliko dhātuḥ and being aśraya of sarvadharma, always remains as a
principle of 'samklistadharma’ and is never regarded as identical with
dharmakāya 9), and 'jñānâpti' is said to be the result of the revolution
(parāvstti) of aśraya, i. e. change of basis from alayavijñāna to jñāna. In
other words, gotra involves two sides, namely “prakſtistha' and 'samudā-
nīta’, and hence has the same structure as avikalpajñāna' and ' tatprş-
thalabdha', while alayavijñāna can never be identical with ' avikalpajñāna'
and in ' jñānâpti’, it no longer remains. This is the reason why the Ratna.,
in spite of its acceptance of the Vijñānavāda in its interpretation of‘jñāna'
and others, never introduced the doctrine of alayavijñāna, and why
the Ratna. could remain thereby, in the field of the pure garbha theory.
At the same time, failure to introduce the alayavijñāna made the garbha
theory weak in its explanation of the gotra as the substratum (ādhāra) of
Samsāra or the phenomenal world. Because of this weak point, the gar-
bha theory in its later development could not but introduce the doctrine
of ālayavijñāna, and there was an attempt at identification, of garbha with
ālayavijñāna, as seen in the Lankāvatāra and the Mahāyānaśraddhôtpāda.
Furthermore, such an innovation of the Vijñānavāda resulted in the ab-
sorption of the garbha theory into the Vijñānavāda, preventing the former
from establishing an independent school of its own. This absorption seems
to have taken place not so long after the Ratna. in the period when the
Vijñānavāda had formed an independent school as the rival of the Mādhy-
amika. At its starting point, however, the garbha theory was no doubt
of an independent character, different from the Vijñānavāda, and the
Ratna. was the first systematized and at the same time the last inde-
pendent and pure exposition of the garbha theory.
One thing to be added here is the similarity of the Ratna. (and the
Vijñānavāda, too) to the Upanişadic philosophy in the expression of
95) According to Paramārtha, however, alayavijñāna is said to bave a mixed
character of real and unreal (LED A). This characterization seems
his unique interpretation of that term, probably influenced by the tathāgatagarbha
theory.
to be
[ 60 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhag a
the Absolute with positive terms 96). In its essence, it is clear, the Ab-
solute taught in the Ratna., being the manifestation of sūnyatā, is of a
quite different character from the substantial Absolute of the Upanişad.
Still it is not impossible to suppose that there was an influence from the
Upanişadic thought for the astivāda of the Ratna. to establish its moni-
stic doctrine. At the same time, many scholars have already remarked
the influence of the Vijñanavāda on the Vedāntavāda in its change of
character from the realistic philosophy of the Brahmasūtra to the idea-
listic philosophy of the Advaita-vedānta which is established by Sankara
through the philosophy of Gaudapāda. To clarify the historical and
social background of the garbha theory and the Vijñānavāda, it seems quite
necessary to investigate such mutual influences and interrelations between
the Brahmanical thought and Mahāyāna Buddhism. This subject is,
however, too wide to cover here, and I cannot but reserve its investiga-
tion for my future studies 97).
§ 3. - Consideration on the Date and Authorship of the Ratna.
As a result of investigations throughout the previous passage, it may
not be useless here to have in conclusion a summarized consideration of the
date and authorship of the Ratna.
As for its date:
1) The upper limit is the date of Nāgārjuna and Aryadeva, i. e. the
middle of the 3rd cent. A.D. It is common to the garbha theory and the
Vijñānavāda in general.
2) The lower limit is 433 A.D. when the Lankāvatāra is translated
into Chinese for the first time.
3) Completion of the present form of the Ratna., i. e. the text con-
sisting of the basic Kārikās and a commentary on it in verse and prose,
came probably after Asanga and Vasubandhu but not so far from their
time, and hence at early 5th cent. A.D.
96) A verse of the Ratna. quite similar to one of the Bhagavadgitā is pointed out
by Prof. V. V. Gokhale (A Note on Ratnagotravibhāga I. 52 Bhagavadgitā XIII, 32,
Prof. S. Yamaguchi's Commemoration Volume, Kyoto, 1955, pp. 90–91).
97) Recently, a great work by Prof. T. R. V. Murti has appeared on this field of
comparative study. (The Central Philosophy of Buddhism, London, 1955) Especially,
Chap. XIII of his work is devoted to the subject of the Absolute seen by three systems,
viz. Mādhyamika, Vijñānavāda and Vedānta. As far as the historical approach is concer-
ned, however, so far no work has been done systematically.
[ 61 )



J. TAKASAKI
4) As for the Kārikā text, especially those verses called śloka
and kept in Chapter I. seem fairly old in both their style and contents;
hence its date is no doubt earlier than Asanga's.
As for the author:
1) The author of the commentary must be Sāramati. This is cer-
tain through comparison of the Ratna. with the Dharmadhātvaviśeşaśāstra
2) Most probably the authorship of the original • śloka' is to be
attributed to Maitreya, taking the Tibetan tradition into consideration.
In the case of the Sūtrâlankāra, the garbha theory and the Vijñānavāda are
taught side by side, while the Abhisamayâlankāra expresses no Vijñānavāda.
Thus it is not impossible that the same author of the above two works com-
posed the original 'śloka' of the Ratna. But against the Tibetan tradition,
the Ratna. seems to have been composed next to the Abhisamayâlaňkāra
but before the Sūtrâlankāra. This is because the garbha theory precedes
Maitreya, but the Vijñānavāda is likely to have started with Maitreya.
3) The Vijñānavāda had probably been established in its pure form
by Vasubandhu. He was no doubt acquainted with the garbha theory
but devoted himself to the systematization of the Vijñānavāda. There-
fore, it is quite doubtful to attribute the Buddhagotraśāstra to him.
4) In the same way, Sāramati was the systematizer of the garbha
theory in its pure form. Because of this similar position, Sāramati may
have been almost contemporary with Vasubandhu. Amalgamation of
both theories may consequently have taken place after Vasubandhu and
Sāramati, since the Lankāvatāra was unknown to either of them.
This seems to be the most reasonable assumption on the date and
author of the Ratna. after the present investigation. For certainty of
Maitreya's authorship of the Ratna., however, pieces of evidence are
still not enough, and we shall be required to engage in further and detailed
examination of all the works attributed to Maitrey
[ 62 ]



SYNOPSIS
OF THE RATNAGOTRAVIBHĀGA
ANALYSIS OF THE GERM OF THE THREE JEWELS BEING
A TREATISE ON THE ULTIMATE DOCTRINE OF THE GREAT VEHICLE
S. Ratnagotravibhāgo (nāma) Mahāyānottaratantraśāstram.
T. Theg-pa-chen-po rgyud-bla-maḥi bstan-bcos rnam-par bśad-pa.
C. Chiu-ching-i-chºang-pao-hsinglun ( - 6 m M THẾ).



SYNOPSIS
CONTENTS
1. TOPIC
(abbreviations)
a. Divisions of chapters in the English translation (I~XVIII) and
their subdivisions.
b. Divisions of chapters in the Sanskrit text.
c. Main topics in each division. (Mentions are made in Sanskrit for
the technical terms and in English for explanations).
2. NUMBER OF VERSES
(K.)
a. Kārikās (those verses picked up as being basic, including ślokas,
uddānas and udāharaņas. See Introduction, II).
b. Verses in the Sanskrit text. Number is according to Johnston's
edition.
(v.)
3. NUMBER OF PAGES IN THE THREE VERSIONS
a. in Sanskrit (Johnston's edition)
b. in Tibetan (Sde-dge edition)
c. in Chinese (Taisho No. 1611)
(S.)
(T.)
(C.)
4. QUOTATIONS & REFERENCES (AUTHORITIES FOR THE RATNA.)
(Q. & R.)
a. Name of sources
b. Number of pages in the Chinese translation (Taisho edition).
(in case the Sanskrit text is available, number of pages or verses in
its Sanskrit edition)
c. those with “Cf' show references but not quotations.
(About abbreviations for the names of texts, see List of Abbrevia-
tions)
5. COMPARISON WITH THE 3 SIMILAR WORKS
a. The Buddhagotraśāstra
b. The Mahāyānadharmadhātvaviśeşaśāstra
c. The Anuttarâśrayasūtra.
(number of pages in Taisho edition)
(BGM)
(DAS)
(AAS)
[ 65 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
Chapter I
The Tathāgatagarbha
(Salutation)
1.1
(Introduction by the Commentator)
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1-7.5
7 Adamantine Subjects (vajrapadāni sapta)
§ 1. The Meaning of the Adamantine Subjects
vajrapada: artha & vyañjana
1
1.1-2.3
2.4-3.10
§ 2. Authorities on the 7 Subjects
1) buddha, 2) dharma, 3) samgha
4) dhātu
5) bodhi
6) guņa
7) karman
2
3.11-6.18
99
§ 3. The Essential Character of the 7 Subjects (taken from DRS)
1)-3) buddha, dharma, & samgha
sarvadharmasamatā' bhisambuddha” (buddha)
supravartitadharmacakra ” (dharma)
anantaśişyagaņasuvinīta ” (sangha)
“mahatā bhikṣusamghena sārdham bodhisattvagaạena
sārdham”
evamguṇasamanvāgataiḥ
1. buddharatnaguņavibhāga
2. dharmaratnaguņavibhāga
3. samgharatnaguņavibhāga
4) buddhadhātu
Illustration of ‘vaiļūryamaņi' (Q)
a verse on ‘viếuddhigotra' (Q) “yathā pattharacuņņamhi ...
şaștyākāra-viśuddhiparikarmaguņa
4 bodhisattvalamkārāḥ
8 bodhisattv’ābhāsaḥ
16 bodhisattvamahākaruņā
32 bodhisattvakarmā
5.5
5.9-6.7
6.9
6.11
6.14
5) bodhi 16 mahābodhikaruņā
6) guņa 10 balāḥ, 4 vaiśāradyāḥ, & 18 aveņikadharmāḥ
7) karman 32 niruttaratathāgatakarmā
[ 66 ]



The Rat nag otravibhāga
T
С
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
74 61
om. instead, 18
verses. 813 a-6
74 61-77 b 2
820 C-822b
74 b 1-6
820 c
(C) AksP 1976
74 6 6-75 b 2
821 a-6
DşdhP 1726
2-3
AAN 467 a
ŚMS 220 c
AAN 467 a
Acint A 915 6
75 b 2-77 61
821 6-822b
DRS la
DRS la-b
(1-3 c)
(3c-46)
(4 c-5 b)
177 a 4
822 a
DRs 21 c
unk (Prakrit)
cf. DRS
(cf. 5 6–8 b)
(cf. 9a-10 a)
(cf. 10 a-10 c)
(cf. 10 c-116)
77 a 5
822 6
(cf. 11 6–14 a)
(cf. 14 c-21 c)
(cf. 26 -627 c)
[ 67 ]
6



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
§ 4. The Inherent Connection among the 7 Subjects (śāstrasam-
bandha)
budha
- dharma
→ sangha garbha, jñānadhātu
3
7.1-5
(dharmakāya =) agra-bodhi, jñānâpti +
dharmāḥ (guņāḥ)
sarvasattvârthakật (karman)
7.6-10.14
(A. Ratnatraya)
II. THE JEWEL OF THE BUDDHA
(buddharatna) (*VP. 1.)
General statement on 'śaraṇatraya'
(Kārikā)
bed
(= 4)
7.13-9.4
i 6-8
8.7
§ 1. The 8-fold Quality of the Buddhahood
1) asamskặtatva (anādimadhyanidhanam)
2) anābhogatā (sāntam)
3) aparapratyayâbhisambodhi (vibuddhaḥ svayam)
4) jñāna, 5) karuņā & 6) sakti
(svayam buddhvā mārgam didesa)
(jñānakịpâsivajravaradh;k)
9.5-10.11
§ 2. Reference to the Jñānâlokâlankārasūtra (on the former 6
guņas)
1) on 'asamskệta' - anutpādânirodha
2) on ‘upaśānta' - anābhoga
3) on 'abhisambodhi
4) on ‘jñāna' & ' karuņā' as sakti'
3 kinds of sattva'
8
sāngana
perceived by `jñāna'
aśuddha', 'avimala ',
vikriditā' “ karuņā
dharmacakrapravarta
- sakti' - 'parârtha'
10.11
$ 1'7) svârthasampad & 8) parârthasampad
two kinds of interpretation
a) svârthasampad - asamskȚta, anābhoga, abhisambuddha
parârthasampatti - jñāna, karuņā, sakti
b) svâr. - jñāna, including the former 3
parâr. karuņā & sakti
• VP. vajrapada
[ 68 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
77 6 1
822 6
77 6 2-79 6 5
822 6-823b
(ŚMS 221 a)
| 813 6
77 b 3-4
822b
822 c-823 a
77 6 4.-78 6 3
cf MN 1, 171
78 6 3–79 6 3
823 a-823 6
JĀA
cf. 240 6
cf. 240 c
cf. 247 b
cf. 247 b
79 b 3-5
823 6
[ 69 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
10.15-13.20
III. THE JEWEL OF THE DOCTRINE
(dharmaratna) (VP 2)
(Kārikā)
2
(= 9)
10
11.3
§ 1. The 8-fold Quality of the Doctrine
1) acintyatva, 2) advayatā, 3) nirvikalpatā, 4) śuddhi,
5) abhivyaktikaraņa, 6) pratipakşatā, 7) virāga, 8) virāgahetu
11
11.9
§ 2. Nirodhasatya & Mārgasatya (virāgitā)
virāgadharma vyavadānasatyadvayalakşaņa of two aspects
'yo yena ca virāgaḥ'
§ 3 The Doctrine as the Truth of Extinction (nirodhasatya)
12
11.16
1) ‘acintyatva'
a. tarkâgocara, b. anabhiläpya, c. pratyātmavedaniya
2) ' advayatā’ & 3) · nirvikalpatā'
'dvaya' karman & klesa, • vikalpa'
ayoniśomanasikāra
(Q. 1)
(Q. 2) 'ajāti' - non-origination of phenomena
(Q. 3) 'duḥkhanirodha' means dharmakāya'
12.2
12.6-10
12.10-14
§ 4 The Doctrine as the Truth of Path (mārgasatya)
12.16-13.20
12.16
1) Similarity to the sun (dharmadivākara) in three ways
4. śudhi, 5. abhivyaktikaraṇa, 6. pratipakşa
2) Origination of bondage (vibandha ) and its removal by jñāna
13.1
-
A. “abhūtavastunimittârambaņa ' ayoniśomanasikāra'
by ' śubhâkāra coming forth of 'rāga' from 'anuśaya'
by 'pratighâkāra – coming forth of dveśa' from 'anuśaya'
by 'avidyâkāra coming forth of • moha ’ from 'anuśaya'
'ayoniśomanasikāra'+ 'kle śa'— 'karman' «janman (duḥkha)'
samklesa
all these are caused by the lack of knowledge on “ ekadhātu '
- tatt-
B. Removal of bondage - perception of' dhātu' as it is
vadarśana avikalpajñāna, being 'dharmakāyaprāptihetu'
[ 70 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
79 b 6-81 b 6
823 6-824 b
79 6 6-7
813 b-c
823 b-C
79 b 7-80 a 2
823c
801 a ff. (IV, 5
yoga)
801 a
80 a 2-5
823 c
80 a 5-81 a 2
823 c-824 a
AAN 467 b
JAA 247 a
ŚMS 221 c
Q. fr. AĀS
Q. fr. ŚMS
496 6
496 6
81 a.2-81 6.6
824 a
virāgahetu
81 a 4
824 6
PP
(as the Comm.
cf. AAĀ 230 ff. by Parāmârtha
cf. ASP VI
332.9-12
354.5-9
370.5-16
[ 71 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
13.21-17.13
IV. THE JEWEL OF THE COMMUNITY
(samngharatna) (VP 3)
(especially, samgha of 'avaivartikabodhisattva)
(Kārikā)
3
(= 13)
13.21--15.14
14
en
14.11
§ 1. Manner and Extent of Perception
‘yathāvadbhāvikatā' & 'yāvadbhāvikatā'
a) Right Manner of Perception (yathāvadbhāvikatā)
perception of pudgaladharmâkhyasya jagato nairātmyakoți',
as well as of 'pudgaladharmâvināśatva'
caused by darśana 'of' cittasya prakſtiprabhāsvaratā' and
'tadupakleśasya ādikşayanirodhaſtā] ’:
(Q)
b) Unlimited Extent of Perception (yāvadbhāvikatā)
perception of 'tathāgatagarbhâstitva in all sattvas ’, ‘prati-
vedha of dharmadhātu', by means of " lokottarajñāna'
15.3-7
15.9-14
16 (C. in
prose)
17 (C. in
16.1-8
prose)
§ 2. Introspective Character of Bodhisattva's Perception
*avabodha * pratyātmalokottarajñānadarśana'
asanga + yathāvadbhāvikatā
* suviśuddha'
apratihata + yāvadbhāvikatā
18
16.9-14
v. (in C.)
om.
§ 3. Superiority of Bodhisattva's Community
1. jñānadarśanaśuddhi & 2. anuttaratathāgatajñāna (-sama)
these belong exclusively to 'avaivartika-bodhisattva'
(10 points of superiority of bodhisattvasamgha
daśaviseşa)
$ 3'. Inferiority of Śrāvaka-sangha
(probably a quotation)
bodhisattva
gaṇasantānâvabhāsa, navacandravat,
possessed of ‘jñāna & karuņā?
śrāvaka svasantānâvabhāsa, tārārūpa,
possessed of ‘prādesikajñāna'
(Q) “yaḥ śīlam ātmârthakaram bibharti
16.15-17.13
17.6--13
V. THE 3 JEWELS AS REFUGES
17.14-20.18
(from śaraṇatraya to buddhasaraņa
“ ekayāna’ theory)
19
17.15-18.11
§ 1. 3 Refuges from the Empirical Standpoint (samvștipadasthāna)
1. buddhasaraña - (śāstſ) for boddhisattvayānika & buddha-
kārakriya
2. dharma-ś. - (śāsana) for pratyekabuddha-y. & dharma-k.
3. samgha-ś. - (sişya) for śrāvaka-y. & samgha-k.
[ 72 ]



The Ratnagotra vibhāga
T
с
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
81 b 6-83 6 3
824 6-825 c
81 b 7-82 a 1
813c
824 C
82 a 2-82 6 5
824 c
(cf. 802 (IV-6
vịtti)
for. (1) 2) (5.
yoga)
182 a 3
ŚMS 222b
82 6 3
825 a
ibid, (5 yoga)
82 b 5-83 a 1
825 a
(5 yoga)
83 a 1-3
825 a
OM.
825 b
83 a 3-83 6 3
825 c
unk.
2 verses (unk)
83 b 3-85 a 5
825 0-826 c
83 6 3-84 a 1
825 c
( 73 )



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
20
18.12-20.3
§ 2. The Doctrine and the Community are not the Ultimate Re-
fuge
reasons: 1. tyājya 2. moşadharma 3. abhāva 4. sabhaya
a) · dharma'
1. deśanā-dharma - mārga, being ' abhisamayaparyavasāna
kolôpama (1) tyäjya
2. adhigama-dharma
1. mārgasatya samskſta asatya, anitya
(2) mặşā-
moşadharmin
2. nirodhasatya (of śrāvakanaya) - kleśaduḥkhâbhāva
(3) abhāva
being abhāva', it can be neither. śaraṇa 'nor' aśaraṇa'
19.6
b) 'samgha' (esp., that of śrāvaka) – (4) sabhaya
1. 'samgha' means “ traiyānika-gana'
2. they are 'sabhaya', 'tathāgatasaraṇagata’, niḥsaraņa-
paryeşin, śaikşa, sakaraṇīya, and 'pratipannaka' towards
bodhi
3. they have 'bhaya-samjñā’, on samskāra' because of
their still being possessed of 'vāsanā', and hence they are
seeking for “ śanaņa' in Tathāgata
4. therefore, ‘samgha ’ is merely ‘prādesikaśaraņa’
5. thus, dharma & samgha are called “paryantakālaśaraṇa'
§ 3. Only the Buddha is the Refuge from the Highest Standpoint
1. ‘muni' is 'anutpādânirodha', of the body of ‘vyavadā-
nasatyadvayalakşaņa-virāgadharma (= dharmakāya)
2. Samgha puts its goal of acquisition on this ‘dharmakāya’
3. therefore, buddha is ' ekam pāramārthikam saraṇam', which
aparântakoțisama, akşaya, nitya, dhruva, śiva, śāśvata
21
20.4-10
is
§ 4. The Meaning of the 3 Jewels
ratna'
he reason why they are called
22
20.11-18
1. durlabhôtpāda, 2. nirmala, 3. prabhā, 4. lokalamkāra, 5. agra,
6. avikāra
(B. Ratnagotra)
VI. THE GERM OF THE 3 JEWELS IN FOUR ASPECTS
21.1--25.17
(Karikā)
4
(= 23)
24
The 4 aspects (catvāri padāni)
I) Samalā tathatā
dhātu, being 'avinirmuktakleśakośa '; tathāgatagarbha
[ 74 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
84 a 2-84 b 5
826 a-6
826 b
84 a 6
cf. ŚMS
(221 a)
(221 a)
(C Quotation)
(2196)
(221 a)
(221 a)
84 b 5-85 a 2
826 b-C
826 c
cf. (SMS)
cf. ŚMS 221 a
85 a 2-6
826 c
808 (IX avikā-
ra, similarity to
prakſtisthagotra)
85 a 6-88 a 4
85 a 6-7
826 c-828 a
813c
826 c
828 a
827 a
85 a 7-85 b 4
469 b (II tathā.
gatadhātu-p.)
4 dharmas
[ 75 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
II) Nirmalā tathatā
tathāgatadharmakāya characterized as "āśrayaparivștti'
III) Vimalā buddhaguņāḥ
lokottarabuddhadharmāḥ, daśabala, etc.
IV) Jinakriyā
anuttaram karma, which is ' anişghita, avirata, apratiprasrab-
dha'
sar-
25
21.13-25.3
§ 1. Inconceivability (acintyatā) of the 4 Aspects (gotra
vadarśinām viņayah)
I) samalā tathatā - 'viſuddhā' & 'samkliştā', at the same
time
22.1-4
(Q) difficulty of understanding the two aspects of citta
II) nirmalā tathatā niḥsamkleśa-visuddhi
(Q) prakſticittajñāna is 'prajñā' by which bodhi is attained
22.6-7
III) buddhaguņa
all sattvas
existence of avinirbhāgadharmatā' in
22.8
22.10-24.8
(Q) analogue of a big painting cloth
(tathāgatajñānam sattvakāye sakalam anupraviştam, api
tu samjñāgrāhataḥ sattvas tam na jānāti)
24.9
IV) jinakriyā – yugapat, sarvatra, anābhogena, avikalpataḥ, ya-
thâśayeşu, yathāvaineyikeşu, akşūņam, anuguņam pravartate
(Q 1) tathāgatakarman is innumerable, nirnānākaraņa being
dharmadhātukriyā
(2) tathāgatakarman acts everywhere, at every time,
equally, in order to teach sattvas
24.11-15
24.16-25.3
26
25.4-25.17
§ 2. The Germ as Cause and Conditions of the 3 Jewels in its 4
Aspects
(gotra śubharatnatrayasargakaḥ ratnagotra)
I) S. Tathatā – bodhya hetu'
II) N. Tathatā – bodhi
III) Buddhaguņa – bodhyanga pratyaya'
IV) Jinakriyā – bodhana
25.11
hetu'
being based upon
pratyaya' being based
tathāgata
pratyātma' knowledge gotra
upon ‘parataḥ' instruction
[ 76 ]



The Rat nag otra vibhā ga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
85 b 4-87 6 6
827 a-c
827 a
ŚMS 222 c
470 c (end of
chap. II)
470 C
473 c (end of
chap. III)
DRS 20 6
86 a 3
827 a
475 c (end of
chap. IV)
827 b
Avats
623 0-624 0
87 a 6
827 c
476 b (end of
chap. V)
DRS 21 c
DRS 21c
476 b
87 b 6-88 a 4
827 c-828 a
828 a
88 a 2-
[ 77 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
(I. Samalā Tathatā) (VP 4) (RG * 1)
dhātu, gotra, tathāgatagarbha, sattvadhātu
VII. THE SERMON: ALL LIVING BEINGS ARE POSSESSED OF THE
MATRIX OF THE TATHAGATA
25.16–26.11
(“ sarvasattvās tathāgatagarbhāḥ ")
(Kärikā)
5
(= 27)
28
26.7
3 Meanings of 'tathāgatagarbhâstitva '
1) “ buddhajñānântargamāt sattvarāśeh' tathāgatadhar-
makāyaparispharaṇârtha dharmakāya’ (TG ** a)
2) "tannairmalyasyadvayatvāt prakſtyā" - tathāgatatathātá-
vyatibhedârtha * tathatā’ (TG b)
“bauddhe gotre tatphalasyôpacārāt” – tathāgatagotrasam-
bhavârtha gotra' (TG c)
(See S p. 69, 1.17 ff.)
VIII. ANALYSIS OF THE GERM FROM 10 POINTS OF VIEW
26.11-59.8
K.
(acc.to C) 29
Summary (uddāna)
10 points: I. svabhāva, II. hetu, III. phala, IV. karman, V. yoga,
VI. (pra-)vịtti, VII. avasthāprabheda, VIII. sarvatraga,
IX. avikāra, & X. abheda
(I) Svabhāva & (II) Hetu
26.19430.2
(Kārikā)
6
(= 30)
§ 1. The Nature of the Essence of the Tathāgata (svabhāva)
Similarity of ‘dhātu' to jewel, sky and water in 3 aspects
31
27.1-11
(aspect)
(simile)
(svalakşaņa)
(sāmānyalakşaņa)
1. dharmakāya - cintāmaņi – prabhāva
2. tathatā - nabbas ananyatābhāva prakřtiparisuddhi
– vāri
- snigdha
3. gotra
27.12-30.2
§ 2. Obscurations and Causes for Purification (hetu)
(4 āvaraņas, 4 kinds of sattvas, 4 hetus of purification)
1) Classification of sattvas
32
33
* RG
ratnagotra ** TG =
tathāgatagarbha
[ 78 )



The Ratna gotravibhāga
T
С
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
88 a 5-88 b 2
828 a
TGS 457 c
1813c
828 6
828 a
808 a
(both T. & C.
interchange the
order of V. 27
& 28)
cf MSA IX 37
88 b 2-106 a 7.
828 6-836 c
814 a
828 6
88 b 4-9061
828 b
796 b (10
arthas)
796 b
892 a (12
arthas)
892 b
10 arthas
(for bodhi)
814 a
88 6 4-5
828 6
IV-1 (sva-
bhāva)
IV-2 (hetu)
III svabhāva
II hetu
88 b 5-89 a 3
828 6
796 b (IV-1
892 b (v. 4) III 869 b (on
svabhāva cintāmaņi)
89 a 3-90 61
828 c-829 b
797 b
892 b II hetu
797 b f.
471 a-6
(III-2. hetu)
[ 79 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
27.17-28.18
A. 1) bhavâbhilāşin - (1) Icchantika
a) aparinirvāṇagotraka (of mokşamārgapratihatâśa)
b) ihadhārmika (= bauddha), but same as a)
(Q) - - on 'icchantika'
28.3-4
2) vibhavâbhilāşin
28.9
28.11-12
29.1-5
a) anupāyapatita (2) Tirthya
i) itobāhyā tīrthyāḥ
ii) ihadhārmika, of pudgaladſșți (0)
iii) ihadhārmika, of sūnyatā-dạşți (0)
b) upāyapatita
i) érāvakayānika – (3) Śrāvaka
ii) pratyekabuddhayānika (4) Pratyekabuddha
3) tadubhayânabhiläşin (= bodhisattvayānika)
mahāyānasampraşthita, of apratişthitanirvāṇa, of drdhakaruņa-
adhyāśaya, mūlapariſuddha
B. (trividha-sattvarăsi)
I) mithyātvaniyataḥ sattvarāśiḥ – 1) bhavâbhilāşin (a) & (6)
II) aniyataḥ sattvarāśiḥ - 2)-a (Tīrthya)
III) samyaktva-niyataḥ sattvarāśiḥ - 2)-6 (śr. & Pr.)
3) (Bodhisattva)
C. (those who are outside of Mahāyāna)
(1) Icchantikāḥ - 1)-a, b)
(2) Tirthyāḥ - 2)-a)
(3) Śrāvakāḥ - 2)—b)-i)
(4) Pratyekabuddhāḥ - 2)-b)-ii)
2) Obstructions (āvaraña) for the 4 kinds of sattvas and their an-
tidotes (pratipakşa)
(1) Ic. - mahāyānadharmapratigha - mahāyānadharmâdhimuktibhāvanā
(2) Tī.
ātmadarśana
- prajñāpāramitā-bh.
duḥkhabhirutva
- samādhi-bh.
(4) Pr.
sattvârthavimukhatā - mahākaruņā-bh.
(sattvas) (ävaraņa)
(pratipaksa)
3) Simile to the 4 pratipakşas, being “hetu' of purification (bo-
dhisattvas are dharmarājaputra', or anujāta in the tathā-
gatakula as being endowed with the 4 pratipakşas)
(1) adhimukti is • bija', (2) prajñā is mātſ', (3) samadhi is
'garbhasthāna', and (4) karuņā is dhātri’
29.5
29.7-14
(3) Śr.
29.15-30.2
34
[ 30 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhāga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
89 a 4-89 b 7
AAN 467 c
471 a
829 a
unk.
471 a
KāśP 634 a
(cf. Lank
146. 11-13)
797 b (Q. from
AAS)
89 b 7--90 a 2
829 a
797 c
4716
90 a 2
829 a
797 c
471 b
90 a 3–90 a 7
829 a
797 c
471 b
90 a 7
829 6
892 b (v. 3)
probably a 798 a
quotation.
Cf. MSA. IV. 11
[ 81 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
os
(III) Phala & (IV) Karman
30.3–37.9
7
(= 35)
36
30.6-31.6
(Kārikā)
§ 1. The 4 Supreme Virtues as the Result of Purification (śubhāt-
masukbanityatvaguņapāramitā)
(viparyāsa) (viparyāsaviparyaya) (guņapāramitā)
1. nitya-samjñā anitya-samjñā
nityapāramitā
2. sukha-s. duḥkha-s.
sukhapāramitā
3. ātma-s.
anātma-s.
ātmapäramitā
4. śubha-s. aśubha--s.
śubhapāramitā
(Q)
30.19-31.6
31.7-32.13
§ 2. Concordance between the 4 Supreme Virtues and the 4 Causes
for Purification
(3) Sr.
A. (1) Ic. – aśuci-samsārâbhirati – adhimukti-bhāvanā – śubha-p.
(2) Ti.
asadātmagrahâbhirati – prajñā-bh. ātma-p.
samsāraduḥkhôpaśamamātrâbbirati samādhi-bh.
sukba-p.
(4) Pr.
asamsargavibārâbhirati karuņā-bh.
nitya-p.
(Reference) on the difference between ‘ātman 'of Heretics and
ātmapäramitā’ of the Tathāgata
31.16
32.7-13
1.
2.
B. (Concordance between the 4 Virtues and the 3 epithets of the
Tathāgata spoken in a scriptural passage)
“ dharmadhātu-parama
śubhapāramitā
ākāśadhātu-paryavasāna ātmapäramitā & sukhapā.
ramitā
3. “ aparântakoți-niştha nityapāramitā
§ 3. 4 Impediments to the Attainment of the Supreme Virtues
(paripanthas retained in Arhats, Pratyekabuddha & Vasitā-
prāpta-bodhisattvas)
32.14-34.7
(paripantha)
(equivalent in bāla) (samklesa)
A. (1) pratyaya-lakşaņa avidyāvāsabhumi
avidya klesa-samklesa
(2) hetulakşaņa anāsravakarman (sāsravakarman) karma-samklesa
samskāra to upādāna
(3) sambhava-lakşaņa manomayâtmabhāva tribhava, jāti
janma-samklesa
(4) vibhava-lakçaņa acintyä pāriņāmikicyuti jarā-maraña
[ 82 ]



The Ratnagotra vibhā g a
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
90 6 1-94 6 5
829 b-831 b
814 a
IV-3 (phala) & 4 paryāya
(for phala)
IV-4 (karman)
829 6
III-3 pari-
pantha &
ÎII-4 phala
471c
90 b 2-91 a 6
829 6
798 a
cf. MPS 617&c
ŚMS 222 a
471 c
91 a 6-92 a 3
829 c-830 a
798 b f.
471 cf.
om.
unk
adds one verse cf. MSA IX 23 798 a (Q. from
& comm. the- & IX 24
MSA ?)
reon with
comm.
829 c-830 a
cf. DBS p 14
91 b7-92 a 3
830 a
92 a 3--93 a 2
830 6-830 C
799 a
pari-
472 b (3
pantha)
[ 83 ]
7



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
33.4-12
(paripantha)
(reason)
(against)
B. (1) avidyāvāsabhūmi
sarvôpakleśa-samniśrayabhūta śubhapāramitā
(2) anāsravakarman
sūksmanimitta-prapañca ātma-p.
samudācāra-samutthāpita
(3) manomaya-atmabhāva manomayaskandha-yogāt
sukha-p.
(4) acintyā pāriņāmiki cyuti samklesanirodha-avigamāt
nitya-p.
(Q 1)
(Q2)
33.15-34.4
34.6
§ 4. Motives of the 4 Supreme Virtues
34.8-35.16
(Tathāgata is)
(1) śubha(suci)
37
(because of)
a) prakſtiśuddhi
b) vaimalyaparisuddhi
a) ātmaprapañcavigamāt
b) nairātmyaprapañcavigamāt .
38
(2) paramâtma
(3) sukha
a) duḥkhanirodhasākşātkarapataḥ
b) manomayaskandhanirodha-sākş.
a) anityasamsārânapakarşaņataḥ
b) nityanirvāņâsamāropaņataḥ
(4) nitya
(Q)
34.20-35.2
§ 4'. The Unstable Nirvāṇa (apratiſthitanirvāṇa) - Bodhisattva's
ideal state
35.3-16
samsāra nirvāņa
in seeking for .nirvāṇa ', - Bodhisattva is not like
(svârtha), by 'prajñā' 'aparinirvāṇagotraka'
in abiding in 'samsāra ', Bodhisattva is not like
(parārtha), by 'karuņā śamaikayānagotra'
39
(probably a
quotation)
35.17-37.9
§ 5. Function of the Germ for its Purification (IV. Karman)
(duḥkhanirvicchamaprāpticchandapraạidhikarmakaḥ) (K 7, cd)
40
36.1-2
A. karman 1) nirvid' of duḥkha
2) ‘icchā', 'prarthanā”, “pranidhi' of nirvāṇa
(Q)
B. motive of this karman is the existence of 'gotra'
purification of gotra by ' adhimukti '&'catuḥśukla'
41
36.8-37.1
( 84 )



The Ratnagotra vibhāga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
892 c
(Q SMS.)
ŚMS 220 a
ŚMS 222 a
93 a 2-93 6 7
830 c-831 a
(in prose)
799 6
892 c
472 b
ŚMS 222 a
93 b 2-93 67
om. most of
799 c
the passages
has another
verse instead
831 a-831 b
93 67-94 b 4
799 C-800 C
ŚMS 222 6
[ 85 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
is only
36.16-37.9
§ 5'. The Saying: " the Icchantikas are of no Nirvāņa
conventional
everybody that lives has the gotra of nirvāņa
(Q 1) simile of sunshine
(Q 2) “anādibhūto “pi câvasānikah....
36.16-37.1
37.6-9
(in verse)
(V) Yoga
37.10-39.8
(Kärikā)
8
(= 42)
37.13-38.8
43
§ 1. The · Union' of the Germ with the Factors of its Purification
(yoga hetusamanvāgama) (on K 8 a , b)
samanvāgama sambandha
(tathāgatadhātu is (functions)
(similarity
• endowed with ')
to an ocean)
1. dharmakāya-viſudd (1) adhimukti
ākara
hihetu
2. buddhajñāna-samu (2) prajñā &
dāgamahetu
(3) samādhi
3. tathāgatamahākaru (4) karuņā
väri
ņāvſttihetu
ratna
38.9-39.8
44
§ 2. The Union of the Germ with the Result of Purification
(yoga = phalasamanvāgama) (on K 8c d)
samanvāgama avinirbhāga, apſthag, dharmadhatusama-
nvāgama
(tathāgatadhātu is (characteristics) (similarity
• endowed with ')
to a lantern)
1. abhijñā
ajñānândhakāra-
aloka
vidhamana
2. āsravakşaya-jñāna klesa-indhana-
uşņa
dahana
3. āsravakşaya
vimala, viếuddhi,
varna
prabhāsvara
(Q)
39.5-8
39.9-40.4
9
(= 45)
(VI) Vștti
(Kārikā)
manifestation of the Germ in 3 ways
(A) přthagjana – viparyasta
(B) ārya aviparyasta
(C) sambuddha - samyagaviparyasta
46
[ 86 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhāga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
94 b 1-4
831 b
800 c; cf. 788 C
(II on Hina-
yāna graha)
JĀA 242 (cf.
Avat S. 616 b)
unk.
94 b 4-95 b 4
831 b-831 c
801 a ff. (IV-5)
814 a
8936 (9) yoga
831 6
94 b 4-95 a 4
831 b
95 a 4-95 b 4
831 c
893 b (v. 13)
om.
95 b 3-4
(cf. 821 b)
AAN 467 a
893 b (Q. AAN)
95 b 5-96 a 3
831 c-832 a
805 c f. (IV-6)
814 a
831c
[ 87 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
(VII) Avasthāprabheda
40.5-41.5
(Kärika)
10
(= 47)
Different States of Manifestation
48
(A) sattvadhātu (= přthagjana) - asuddhāvasthā
(B) bodhisattva (= ārya) - aśuddhasuddha-a.
(C) tathāgata (= sambuddha) - suvisuddha-a.
(Q)
40.16-41.5
(VIII) Sarvatraga
41.6-17
(Kārikā)
11
(= 49)
50
(Commentary) • All-pervadingness' of 'cittaprakſti' (= dhātu),
like ākāśa' irrespective of (A)doşa, (B)guņa or (C) nişthā
(-guņa)
(Q)
41.15-17
41.18-54.15
(IX) Avikāra
* Unchangeability of the Germ throughout the 3 States
Introduction
41.18-42.4
uddāna: doşâgantukatāyogatva & guṇaprakſtiyogatva
51
42.5-46.4
12-23
(= 52-
63)
(A) Unchangeability in the Impure State (aśuddhâvasthāyām
avikāritva) - 'sattvadhātu'
(Kārikās) 'dhātu' is like ākāśa being the basis of all phe-
nomena but having no support on which it depends.
origination of the worldly phenomena
1. cittaprakſti ākāśa
2. ayoniśomanasikāra vāyu
3. karmaklesa - vāri
4. skandhadhātvāyatana – přthivi
(Commentary)
(54)
(53)
[ 88 ]



The Ratnagotravibhā ga
T
С
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
96 a 3-96 64
832 a-8326
806 a (IV-7)
469 C
893 a (6) ava-
sthāprabheda
814 a
832 a
832 a
AAN 467 b
806 6 Q. AAS
893 a Q. AAN 469 C
96 b 4-97 a 2
832 b
806 b (IV-8)
814 a
832 6
806 b Q. AAS
469 C
..
97 a 1-2
832 6
AAN 467 b
97 a 2-103 66
832 6-835 b
806 c f. (IV-9)
97 a 2-6
832 6
(all in
verse)
as a Q from
SNS
97 a 6-99 a 5
832 c-8336
814 a-b
832c
893 a
(8) nitya
v. 12
v. 11
[ 89 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
44.1-45.9
64
§ 1. Unoriginated Character of the Innate Mind (avikāra anut-
pādânirodhatva of dhātu)
origination of the world does not originate “cittaprakſti, nor
is 'cittaprakſti ' destroyed by the fire of mộtyuvyādhijarā'
(on KK 12–14)
(Q) on cittaprakſti'
prakſtiprabhāsvaram cittam āgantukair upakleśair upakliśyate
§ 2. Indestructible Character of the Innate Mind
45.10-46.4
65
simile of "agni' for 'mộtyuvyādhijarā' as `upasarga'
yugântâgni mrtyu
nārakâgni vyādhi
prākſtâgni - jarā
(Q) eternity of tathāgatagarbha
45.20-46.4
46.5-53.8
(B) Unchangeability in the Pure-and-Impure State (aśuddha-
śuddhâvasthāyām avikāritva) – ‘ bodhisattva'
(Kārikā)
24
(= 66)
46.10-47.7
67
§ 1. Pure Character and Impure Character of the Bodhisattva
1) ‘pure' state: bodhisattva has no calamity (vyasana) as
experienced among ordinary beings (on K 24 a b)
2) 'impure' state: however, he pretends to have calamities
because of his ‘mahākaruņā’ (on K24 c d)
(References to the Scriptures) (2-§ 6)
68
47.7-16
§ 2. Defilements endowed with the Virtuous Root (kusalamūla-
samprayuktaklesa)
47.17-48.16
§ 3. Bodhisattva's Compassion The Parable of a Householder
midhakūpa → samsāra
ekaputraka + sattvadhātu
mātſ, jñāti → śrāvakayānika, pratyekabuddhayānika
gphapati(pitſ) + bodhisattva
§ 4. Bodhisattva's Perception of the Pure Mind
48.17-50.7
1) Perceiving that sarvadharmas are created illusionally, bo-
dhisattva has neither disgust nor attachment to samsāra
2) Parable of 'vaiļūryamaņi' on cittaprakſti & ägantukaklesa
[ 90 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
T
С
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
97 b 6-98 b 5
832 c-833 b
adds 2 morc
verses
469 b
AN)
GagS 124 c
1.5.9-10
IV.1-2
cf. Mahāvi.
bhāsā (Taisho,
XXVII, 140 b)
98 b 5-99 a 5
833 b
99 a 3-5
833 b
ŚMS 222b
893 b (Q ŚMS)
99 a 5-103 a 3
833 6-835 a
I 814 6
833 b
99 a 6-99 b 3
(in prose)
99 6 3-100 a 2
833c
SagP 68 b
100 a 2-100 b 4
834 a
SagP 68 6
470 a-6
100 b 4-101 61
469 6-c
om. the passage SagP 68 a
before the ex- cf. MSbh (P)
ample of vai- 259 c-260 a
ļūryamaņi (Q AAS)
834 b
[ 91 )



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
50.8-12
§ 5. Samsāra in the case of Bodhisattva
• samsāra' means 'traidhātukapratibimbako manomayakāya-
trayaḥ' in anāsravadhātu – Impure state
this is, at the same time, ‘nirvāṇa’ - Pure state
(Q)
50.10-11
50.13-51.9
(missing in
§ 6. Bodhisattva in his 6th Stage
1) Perfect Wisdom, but no experience of .nirvāṇa' owing
to his Compassion
2) Parable of a castle (Q)
3) Readiness for • asravakşaya'
owing to jñāna' - śuddhâvasthā
assuming of life in samsāra for the sake of others owing
to • karuņā' asuddhâvasthā
(Another Interpretation of K 24 (v. 66))
S.T.)
51.10-53.8
(a later 69–78
interpo-
lation)
§ 7. The Pure and Impure State of Bodhisattva in comparison
with Ordinary Beings and the Buddha
1) Comparison with sattva below Pramuditābhūmi
(4 kinds of bodhisattva) (bhūmi)
1. prathamacittôtpädika 1st (Pramuditā)
2. caryāpratipanna 2nd (Vimalā) to 7th (Dūramgamā)
3. avivartika
8th (Acalā)
4. ekajātipratibaddha (9th &) 10th (Dharmameghā)
2) Comparison of 'nişthāgata-bodhisattva' with the Buddha
(vv. 77-78)
53.9-54.15
(C) Unchangeability in the Perfectly Pure State (suviếuddhâva-
sthāyām avikāritva) - ‘Buddha'
(Kärika)
25
(= 79)
80-82
1) 4 Characters of 'avikāra' in 'buddhabhūmi'
1. nitya of no birth – with 'manomayakāya'
2. dhruva of no death
by 'acintyā pāriņāmiki cyuti
3. śiva of no illness
by ‘avidyāvāsabhūmi
4. śāśvata of no decrepitude - by 'anāsravakarman
2) Appliance of these 4 terms to K 25
1. nitya - ananyathậtmā - akşayadharmayogataḥ
2. dhruva jagaccharaṇya anaparântakotitaḥ
3. śiva sada dvaya – avikalpatvataḥ
4. śāśvata avināśadharma akệtasvabhāvataḥ
(Q)
83
54.8
W
54.12-15
[ 92 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
101 b 1-4
834 b-c
ŚMS 221 6
101 b 4-102 a 5
834 c-835 a
834 c
RCS 181 a
102 a 5-103 a 3
om.
103 a 3-103 6 6
835 a-b
( 814 6
( 835 a
892b (1) phala
103 b 2
835 6
8926
835 6
AAN 467 b
[ 93 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
55.1-59.8
(X) Asambheda
Undifferentiation of the Germ from the Absolute
26
(= 84)
85,86
55.7-56.6
55.14-15
55.16-17
55.18-19
(Kārikā)
§ 1. Synonyms for the Essence of the Tathāgata (on K 26 a b)
1. 'dharmakāya’
buddhadharmâvinirbhāga (Q)
2. tathāgata' gotrasya tathāgamaḥ (Q)
3. ‘āryasatya' amrşāmoşadharmitva (Q)
4. 'parama-nirvāņa ādiprakſtiśāntatā (Q)
Reference to 1) dharmakāya
2) tathāgata
3) āryasatya
4) nirvāņa
55.20
56.2-3
56.3-4
56.4-5
56.5-6
56.7-57.5
87
56.14-57.5
56.14-15
§ 2. The Point: Buddhahood is Nirvāṇa (on K 26 c d)
1) buddhatva, as representing abhisambuddha' is ' nirvāņa
being ‘savāsanamala-uddhști'
2) 4 characteristics of the Highest Nirvāņa (caturākāraguṇani-
spattyasambhinnalakṣaṇanirvāṇa)
1. sarvākāra, 2. asamkhya, 3. acintya, 4. amala (Q)
(Q 1)
(Q2)
§ 3. The Parable of Painters
(on Tathāgata as ‘sarvākāraguņôpetaśūnyatā ')
Without the accomplishment of all the 6 pāramitās, there is no
Buddhahood
56.16-17
56.18-57.2
57.6-57.20
88-92
57.20-58.9
58.10-59.8
§ 3'. The Relation of the 4 Characteristics to boddhisattvabhūmis
(stages)
(acquisition of)
Acalā
1. guņa-sarvatā
Sadhumati 2. guņa-aprameyatā
Dharmameghā 3. guņa-acintyatā
Buddhabhūmi 4. guņa-viếuddhiparamatā
4. Similarity of the Buddhahood to the Sun
1) 3 points of similarity (višeşalakşaņa)
1. prajñā (lokottara, nirvikalpa) - dīpti – prabhā
2. jñāna (prşthalabdha) - spharaṇa – rasmi
3. vimukti of cittaprakřti – visuddhi - maņdala
2) Individuality of properties with substance
(sāmānyalakşaņa)
(Q)
93
94
58.20 f.
59.5-8
[ 94 ]



The Ratna gotravibhā g a
T
с
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
103 b 6-106 a 7
835 6-836 c
811 c ff. (IV-10) 893 c-894 a
Asambheda 12 ekatva
vv. 23 24
| 814 6
835 b
835 b-c
103 67-104 6 2
811 c
ŚMS 221 c
Şads
cf. BBh 3, 2-4
unk.
JĀA 341 c
469 6
AAN 467 a
ŚMS 220 c
ŚMS 222 a
ŚMS 220 c
104 6 2-105 a 3
835 c-836 a
812 c
MSP (verse)
SMS 219 c
SMS 219 c
105 a 3-105 a 7
836 a -836 b
cf. RCS 176
(C quotes the
parallel passage
105 a 7-105 b 5
836 b
812 c
cf. MSbh (P)
258 6
105 b 5-106 a 7
836 6-c
106 a 2 f.
836 c
106 a 5-7
836 c
ŚMS 220 6
894 a (Q. ŚMS)
[ 95 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
IX. THE 9 ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE GERM COVERED WITH DEFI-
59.9-73.8
LEMENTS
95
59.9-67.2
§ 1. The 9 Illustrations according to the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra
(Introduction & Summary)
aparyantaklesakośakoțigūdhas tathāgatagarbhaḥ'
anādisāmnidhyâsambaddhasvabhāva-klesakośatā
anādisāmnidhya-sambaddhasvabhāva-śubhadharmatā
(= 96-
59.16-60.10
98)
60.11-61.2
61.3-61.15
(= 99-
101)
(= 102-
104)
(= 105-
107)
(= 108-
111)
61.16-62.8
62.9-63.6
(Kārikās) Summary of Illustrations
27-29
(Kārikās) The 9 Illustrations
(I) • klesas' are like an ugly ‘padmako sa'
30-32
dhātu' is like a 'buddha' abiding inside a padma
(II) • klesas' are like “kşaudra-prāņaka' (honey-bees)
33-35
dhātu' is like kşaudra' (honey)
(III) • klesas
are like
bahis-tuşa’ (outer husk)
36-38
dhātu' is like săra' (inner kernel)
(IV) ‘kleśas' are like 'aśucisamkāradhāna' (a dirty place filled 39-42
with impurities)
dhātu' is like 'suvarna' (gold)
(V) *klesas' are like 'pşthivítala' (the bottom of the ground) | 43–45
• dhătu' is like 'ratnanidhi' (treasure of jewels)
(VI) ‘klešas' are like 'tvak-kośa' (the bark-covering of a seed) 46-48
dhātu ' is like 'bījankura' (the germ within a seed)
(VII) • klesas' are like 'pūtivastra' (tattered garment)
49-51
dhātu is like 'ratnavigraha (a precious image)
(VIII) ‘kleśas' are like ‘āpannasattvanāri' (a pregnant woman)
52-54
• dhātu' is like 'cakravartin' (in the embryonal state)
(IX) “ kleśas' are like “ mệt-panka-lepa ' (an earthen mould) 55-57
dhātu' is like .kanaka-bimba’ (a golden statue)
(Commentary)
udāharaṇa-piņņârtha'
cittasamklesadharma-āgantukatva
cittavyavadānadharma-sahajâvinirbhāgată
(Q) “ cittasamkleśāt sattvāḥ samkliśyante, cittavyavadānād
viśuddhyante
(= 112-
63.7-63.19
114)
(= 115- 63.20-64.10
117)
(= 118 64.11-65.2
120)
2
= 121-
65.3--65.16
123)
124- 65.16-66.10
126)
127-129
66.11-67.2
67.1-2
§ 2. 9 Kinds of Defilements the Impurities of the Mind (citta-
samkleśa illustrated by ‘padma', etc.).
67.3-68.16
[ 96 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
106 a 7-112 a 5
837 a-8396
806 C-808 c
(IV-9) avikāra
106 a 7- 108 6 6
837 a
TGS 457 c
cf. AAN 467 b
8118
106 b 2-106 b 5
814 6-0
837 a
106 b 5-7
814 C
cf. TGS 457 c
106 6 7-107 a 3
814 C-815 a
cf. TGS
457 c-458 a
107 a 3-6
815 a
cf. TGS 458 a
107 a 6-107 b 2
815 a-b
cf. TGS 458 a--b
107 6 2-5
815 6
cf. TGS 458 6
cf. MPS 407 b
107 b 5-108 a 1
815 b-c
cf. TGS 458 C
108 a 1-4
815 c
cf. TGS
458 c-459 a
108 a 4-7
815 c-816 a
cf. TGS 459 a
108 a 7-108 6 3
816 a
cf. TGS
459 a-b
108 b 3-6
837 6
unk (cf. SN
III, 151 Vim
N. 563 b)
108 6 6-109 b 7
837 b-c
806c
[ 97 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
(samtāna)
(jñāna by which
klesa is removed)
(phala)
(klesa)
1. rāgânusa-
yalakşa-
130
131
132
pa-kl.
2. dveşânu-
laukikavītarā. lokottara-jñ.
śayalak-
rūpârūpya-
dhātu
paņa-kl.
gasämtānika
3. mohânu-
śayalak-
saņa-kl.
4. tivra-rā rāgâdicarita aśubhâdibhā kāmadhātu
gâdipa-
sattva-s. vanā-jñ.
ryava-
sthānala-
kşaņa-kl.
5. avidyāvā-
arhat-s. tathāgata manomaya-
sabhūmi-
bodhi-jñ
kāya
samgphi-
ta-kl.
6. darśana přthagjanaśai- prathamalokot (aśuddha-
prahāta kşa-s. taradharmada bhūmi)
vya-kl.
rśana-jñ.
7. Lhāvana-
ārya yathādịşğalokot. (aśuddha-
prah.-kl. pudgala-s. taradharmabhā bhūmi)
vanā-jñ.
8. a suddha anişthāgata- aştamyādibhū-
(Suddha-
bhūmiga- bodhisattva-s. mitrayabhāva bhūmi)
ta-kl.
nā-jñ
9. suddha nişțbāgata vajrôpamasa (buddha-
bhūmiga bodhisattva-s. mādhi-jñ. bhūmi)
ta-kl.
133
68.11-16
4 kinds of sattvas with respect to their 'aśuddhatā'
1. prthagjana klesa 1.-4.
2. arhat klesa 5.
3. śaikşa klesa 6. & 7.
4. bodhisattva klesa 8. & 9.
68.17-69.16
§ 3. Concordance between the 9 Illustrations and the 9 Kinds of
Defilements
134-143
1. padma + rāgarati
2. bhramarāḥ → dveşa
3. bahistușa → mohâņdakośa hiding sārârthadarśana
[ 98 )



The Ratnagotravibhāga
T
С
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
(v. 132) 109 6–3 (v.132 in prose)
109 6 5 ff.
837 C
TGS 457 c
(repetition)
109 b 7-110 a 6
838 a
807 C-808 a
[ 99 ]
8



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
4. amedhya → paryutthāna
5. vasudhā – avidyāvāsabhūmi hiding buddhatva
6. bījatvak → darśanaheya-vyāvịtti covering tattvadarśana
7. pūtivastra → bhāvanājñānaheya
8. garbhakośamala → saptabhūmigata-mala
9. mộtparkalepa → tribhumigata-mala
69,17-73.8
§ 4. The 3-fold Nature of the Essence the Purifying Element
within the Mind and its concordance with the 9 Illustrations
(trividhasvabhāva being 'cittavyavadānahetu ')
Summary: trividha-svabhāva'
a) dharmakāya-svabhāva Illustrations (I)–(III)
b) tathatā-svabhāva
(IV)
c) gotra-svabhāva
(V)-(IX)
69.17-70.1
144
70.1-71.4
145
146
147
a) 'dharmakāya' (TG a)
1) dharmadhātu pratyātmâdhigamadharma - buddha (1)
2) tad-nişyanda desanādharma
i) bodhisattvapiţaka → sūkşma paramārthasatya – (eka-
rasa) – madhu (2)
ii) sūtra, geya, etc. + audārika
samvştisatya (vici-
trarasa) – sāra (3)
Significance: sattvadhātoḥ tathāgatadharmakāyena parispha-
rapatā” (v. 28 a)
' tathāgatagarbha' tathāgatasya ime garbhāḥ sarva-
sattvāḥ ”
70, 18-19
(Q) simile of 'ākāśa'
71.1-4
71.5-17
b) .tathatā' (TGb)
cittaprakſti tathatā (avikára, kalyāna, viếudhi) – suvarna
(4) 'tathāgata' prakſteḥ visuddhim tathatām āgataḥ "
148
Significance: “tathatâvyatibhedatā" (v. 28 b)
“ tathāgata tathatā eşām garbhaḥ
tathāgatagarbha'
sarvasattvānām”.
(Q 1) avyatibhedatā between “buddha' and
sattva'
76.12-14
(Q 2) tatbāgata
-
= tathātā śuddhim āgatā
71.16-17
c) '(tathāgata-)gotra' (TG c)
71.18-73.8
[ 100 ]



The Rat nag otra vibhāga
T
с
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
110 a 6-112 a 5
838 6-8396
808 a
110 a 6-110 b 2
838 6
110 6 2-111 a 3
833 6
808 a
cf. MSbh (P)
2526
MSA IX, 15
808 a (Q)
111 a 2-3
838b
808 b
111 a 3-111 b 2
838b
111 a 7-111b1
838b
JĀAT247 a
111 61
838b
MSA IX, 37
111 b 2-112 a 5
838 6-c
808 b-c
( 101 )



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
149-152
(hetu)
(phala)
gotra prakſtistha → svabhāvakāya (svābhāvika)
sambhogakāya (sambhogika)
samudānīta +
nirmānakāya (nairmāņika)
Analogy:
prakſtisthagotra – nidhāna (5)
hetu
samudānītagotra – phalavşkşa (6)
svābhāvika (akſtaka, śubha) - ratnavigraha (7)
phala sāmbhogika (mahādharmâdhirāja) – cakravartin (8)
nairmāṇika (pratibimba) - hemabimba (9)
gotra dhātu hetu' of buddhatva manifested in 3 kāyas
Significance: trividhabuddhakāyôtpattigotrasvabhāvârtha
cf. “ bauddhe gotre tatphalasyôpacārāt ” (v. 27)
'tathāgatagarbha' tathāgatadhātur eşām garbhaḥ sarva-
sattvānām.
(Q 1) “ tathāgatadhātur utpanno garbhagataḥ samvidyate.."
(Q 2) .anādikāliko dhātuḥ' (from the Abhidharmamahāyā.
nasūtra)
ww
72.13-14
Commentary on (Q 2)
72.12-73.8
1) 'anādikāliko' (dhātu) “ pūrvakoţir na vidyate ” (Q)
72.15-16
2) ‘dhātu' tathāgatagarbha is
lokottaragarbha' &c. (Q)
72.16-73.1
niśraya, ādhāra,
73.2-73.5
3) “sarvadharmasamāśraya' āśraya
pratişthā (Q)
4) 'tasmin sati gatiḥ sarvā' (Q)
5) ' nirvāṇâdhigamo 'pi ca' (Q)
73.6
73.7-8
73.9–77.8
X. THE ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MATRIX OF THE
TATHĀGATA
73.9-16
§ 1. The Saying: 'All Living Beings are possessed of the Ma-
trix of the Tathāgata', is the Highest Logical Truth (gar-
bhāstitva is dharmatā being yukti, yoga, upāya)
1) 'dharmānām dharmatā utpādād vā tathāgatānām
anutpādād vă ete sattvās tathāgatagarbhāḥ (Q)
2) This "dharmatā is only accessible to śraddhā
73.11-12
[ 102 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
T
С
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
Cf. BBh 3
MSA III, 4
8:18 C
om,
unk.
Abhidhs cf.
Sthiramati on
VMT p. 37.
111 b 6-112 a 5
839 a-8396
MSbh (P) 156 c
157 a cf. ŚMS
222 b SNII 178,
198, etc. MK
XI 1 Candra-
kirti thereon
ŚMS 222b
cf. MSbh (P)
264 b
ŚMS 222 6
796 b
(5-garbha
theory)
ŚMS 222 b
ŚMS 222 6
112 a 5-114 b5
839 6-840 6
112 a 5-112 b 1
839 6
811c
TGS 457 c
cf. SN II, 25
Lank 142.
[ 103 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
74.1-75.17
153
74.5-6.
§ 2. The 4 Kinds of Individuals to Whom the Faith in this Essence
is Necessary.
1) Emphasis of the faith in the Tathāgata
2) 4 kinds of people
1. pţthagjana, 2. śrāvaka, 3. pratyekabuddha, 4. navayāna-
samprasthita-bodhisattva
3) 3 kinds of individuals referred in the Scripture (Q)
a) satkāyadretipatita, b) viparyāsâbhirata, c) sünyatāvik-
șiptacitta
a) 'satkāyadşəțipatitāḥ' - 1. bālapſthagjana, having aham-
kāra, mamakāra' on sāsravadharmas, cannot understand
anāsravadhātu characterized as satkāyanirodha
b) 'viparyāsâbhiratāḥ – 2. śrāvaka & 3. pratyekabuddha are
clinging to' anitya, duḥkha, anātma, & aśubha-samjñā and
cannot understand ' tathāgatagarbha as nitya-sukha-ātma-
śubhapāramitā'
74.7-10
74.10-75.12
74.22-75.11
75.13-17
75.17-77.8
154
155
(Q) on viparyastasamjñā' (parable of water-sport)
c) • śūnyatāvikşiptacittāḥ' - 4. navayānasamprasthitā bo-
dhisattvā” are tathāgatagarbhaśūnyatârthanaya-vipra-
naştāḥ' and thinking:
i) ‘parinirvāṇa' means
means 'atyanta-vināśa of dharmas'
ii) ‘śūnyatā’ is something substantial to be obtained
§ 3. The True Conception of the Matrix of the Tathāgata as re-
presenting Non-substantiality (tathāgatagarbha-śūnyatâ'
rthanaya) (continuation of c) sūnyatāvikșiptacittāḥ)
1) ' śünya' and 'aśünya'
There is nothing' apaneya' nor
upaneya',
dhātu is ' śünya' of 'āgantukamalas '
but is 'aśūnya’ of “avinirbhāga-dharmas'
(Q) true perception of sūnya and aśūnya.“ yad yatra nāsti tat
tena śünyam; yat punar atrâva iştam bhavati tat sad ihâsti ”.
2) Definition of ' śūnyatāvikșiptacitta' " yeşām itaḥ śūnyatā
rthanayād bahis cittam vikşipyate te -".
Without knowing ‘paramaśūnyatârtha, dhātu is not understood.
(Q) tathāgatagarbhajñāna = tathāgatānām sūnyatājñāna.
3) Inaccessibility of tathāgatagarbha
tathāgatagarbha being:
1. dharmadhātugarbha - a) satkāyadſstipatitānām agocaraḥ
2. dharmakāya, lokottaradharmagarbha - b) viparyāsâbhi-
ratānām agocaraḥ
76.8-9
76.15-16
76.16-77.8
[ 104 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
T
с
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
112 6 1-113 a 6
839 6-840 a
cf. MSbh (P)
258 b-c
812 a f.
cf. ŚMS 222 a
112 b 3-4
839 b
ŚMS 222 a
112 b 4-6
839 6
112 b 6-113 64
839c-840 a
113 a 4-113b 3
839c-840 a
MPS
377 c-378 a
113 6 4-6
840 a
8126
113 6 6-114 6 5
840 a--840 6
812 b
cf. AA
v. V, 21 &c.
812 6
(0)
893 6
(9) v. 14
ŚMS 221 c
cf. MN III, 104
114 a 6--114 b5
ŚMS 221 c
cf. ŚMS 222 6
cf. MSbh (P)
156 c 264 b
796 6
(5 kinds of
garbha)
( 105 )



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
3. prakſtiparisuddha-dharmagarbha - c) sūnyatāvikşipta-
cittānām agocaraḥ
4. lokottaradharmakāya-prakřtiparisuddhi - d) daśabhūmi-
sthita-bodhisattvāḥ can perceive a little
(Q) chidrâbhre nabhasîva
77.2
77. 5-8
77.9–78.20
58
59
(= 156)
(= 157)
158-160
78.1-6
161-165
78.7-16
XI. THE PURPOSE OF INSTRUCTION
(deśanāprayojana)
(Kārikās)
question: Why is ‘buddhadhātu-astitva' maintained here?
answer: In order to prevent “5 doşas '.
(Commentary)
1) Teaching in the previous sūtras (pūrvam uktam) is: 'śunyam
sarvam, meghâdivat'.
In this uttara tantra ', dhātu-astitva is taught.
2) "5 doşas' to be prevented
1. lina-cutta nicacittānām ātmâvajñānadoşa
2. binasattvâvajñā (having a pride of own bodhicitta')
3. abhūtagrāha misconception of • aśūnyatā, on abhūta-
dharma
4. bhūtadharmâpavāda misconception of śūnyatā' on
* bhūtadharma (i. e. dharmakāya, etc.)
5. ātmasneho •dhikaḥ failure in taking 'sattvâtmasama-
darsikā' (maitrī)
3) '5 guņas
to be obtained by this teaching
1. prôtsāha niravajñā
2. śāstȚgaurava samaprekşin
3. prajñā nirdoşa (obtaining the sūnya conception of
dharmas)
4. jñāna - guṇavat (obtaining aśūnya conception on dhātu)
5. mahāmaitri – ātmasattvasamasneha (attainment of“ budd-
hatā ')
(Colophon) - End of Chapter 1.
166-167
78.17-20
78.21-22
79-90
Chapter II - The Enlightenment (bodhi)
(II. NIRMALĀ TATHATĀ) (VP 5) (RG II)
bodhi, dharmakāya, āśrayaparivștti, buddhatva
XII. GENERAL CHARACTHERISTICS OF THE REALITY FREE FROM
POLLUTIONS
(8 Categories of 'nirmalā tathatā ')
79.2-20
[ 106 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
T
с
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
cf. MPS 411 a
(652 C, 887 a
unk. (in verse)
114 b 5-115 a 6
840 b-c
787 a-c
I nidāna
811 b
816 a-6
840 6
cf. PP &c
811 b
787 b
787c
469-6-c
115 a 6-7
115 a 7-119 6 5
841 a-843 c
Chap. III
bodhi
470 c-473 c
115 a 7-116 a 1
841 a
[ 107 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
1, 2
(term in v. 1)
(term in v. 2) (C takes
v. 1. as
1. suddhi
svabhāva
(I) | kārikā)
(āśrayaparivștter svabhāva viếuddhiḥ)
2. prāpti (means of attainment)
hetu
(II)
a) avikalpa-lokottarajñāna
b) tatprøthalabdha-laukikajñāna
3. visamyoga
phala (III)
a) kle savarana-visamyoga
b) jñeyâvaraṇa-visamyoga
4. svaparârtha
karman
a) svârthasampatti,b) parârthasampatti
5. tadāśrayaḥ
yoga
(V)
(karmaṇor adhişthāna-samanvāgamah)
6. gāmbhiryâudāryamāhātmya)
vștti (VI)
(manifestation of āśrayaparivștti in the
forms of trikāya)
7. yāvatkālam (duration of manifestation) nitya (VII)
8. yathā (mode of manifestation)
acintya (VIII)
(IV)
(Q) on 'svabhāva'
79.11-12
XIII. 8 POINTS ON THE UNDEFILED REALITY
80.1-90.13
80.1-80.15
(I) Svabhāva & (II) Hetu (buddhatva and its prāptyupāya).
(Kārikā)
1
(= 3)
80.6-80.15
4
5
6
7
(Commentary)
1. “buddhatva 'is like the sun and the sky because of its “jñāna'
and 'prahāṇa' (on K 1b)
2. “buddhatva’ is endowed with numberless properties (prakſti-
prabhāsvara, amala, nitya, dhruva, śāśvata, etc.) (on Kla, c)
3. “klesa- & jñeya-āvaraṇa’ are like clouds being 'svabhā-
vāparinişpatti, vyāpi, āgantuka' (on K 1b)
4. The cause (hetu) of the acquisition of buddhatva 'is the avi-
kalpajñāna & tatprşțhalabha (on K 1 d)
(III) Phala (vaimalyasuddhi visamyoga from āvaraña)
Two kinds of suddhi'
a) prakſtiviśuddhi svabhāva (common to samalā ta-
thatā) (vimukti, but na visamyoga)
b) vaimalyaviếuddhi phala – (unique to nirmalā tathatā,
(vimukti, and visamyoga)
80.15-82.4
80.15
[ 108 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
816 a
470 c
841 6
(cf. MSbh (P)
2586
311 a
4726
ŚMS 221 b
116 a 1-119 6 5
841 6-843c
116 a 1-116 a 7
841 6
816 6
841 6
893 b (v. 10)
116 4-3
116 a 5-116 5 6
841 b
893 6-c
(11)artha-kriya
cf. MSA XII 15
[ 109 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
(Kārikās)
2,3
(= 8,9)
(Commentary)
81.9-82.4
klesavisuddhi (on K. 2 a, b, c)
10
1. phala of .avikalpajñāna
phala of 'tatprşphalabdha-
jñāna'
vimalaguņopeta (on K. 2 d)
11
2. ‘visamyoga' and 'guņopeta'
12
13
a) removal of - 'dhyānavārya - vimalâmbu on
rāga'
bhişyandana' padma (on K. 2 a)
b) release from - jagatspha - pūrņacandra
• Rāhu 'of' dveşa' raņa-karuņā' (on K. 2 b)
c) release from
• tamovidha - amalarka
moha?
manajñāna' (on K. 2 c)
14
(2)
15
3. similarity to 'buddha', etc. (9 illustrations taught in
Chap. I) (on K. 3)
1. atulyatulyadharmatya – buddha
(1)
2. saddharmarasadānatā – honey
3. phalguvyapagamatā – kernel
(3)
4. pavitratā (śuddhi) – gold
(4)
5. dāridryavinivartanatā treasure
(5)
6. vimuktiphaladānatva
(6)
7. dharmaratnâtmabhāva (dharmakāya) – precious image (7)
8. dvipadâgrâdhipati (sāmbhogika) – king
(8)
9. rūparatnâkſti (nairmāņika) – golden statue
16
tree
17
(9)
(IV) Karman
82.5-84.2
a) svârthasampatti dharmakāyaprāpti (karman of avi-
kalpa-jñ).
b) parârthasampatti - kāyadvayena pravșttiḥ (karman of
tatprsthalabdha-jñ.).
(Kärikäs
4-6
18-
20)
(Commentary)
83.5-84.2
[ 110 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhāg a
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
116 a 7-116 6 1
816 b
841 6
116 b 2-116 5 6
841 b-c
(10) an-artha
kriyā
893 c (v. 17)
893 b (v. 16)
893 c (v. 19)
116 b 6-117 61
841 c-842 a
472 c (5)
(karman)
117 a 2-4
816 6
842 a
117 a 4-117 61
842 a
[ 111 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
21
21
22
23
24
26 a b
1) Twofold function of 'dharmakāya’ - svārthasampatti - ( on
K. 4ab)
1. vimuktikāyasya pūrņam - (prakſtiviśuddhi)
dharmakāyasya śodhanam - (vaimalyaśuddhi)
2. characteristics of dharmakāya 1) anāsrava, 2) vyāpi
3) asamskstapada (avināśadharmi)
3. 1) anāsravatva klesanirodha
2) vyāpitā asanga, apratighāta
3) asamskſtatva avināśitva
4. 'avināśitya '=dhruva, śiva, śāśvata, acyuta, being the
counterpart of pūti, vikſti, ucchitti, acintyā
pāriņāmikī cyuti, resp.
2) Basis of the objects of cognition
(Function of rūpakāya) – parārthasampatti -(on KK 4 cd, 5, 6)
tathāgata is 'pada' (=āspada, nimittabhūta) for:
1. vibhūtirūpârtha-vidarśana – (rūpa)
2. sukathāśuciśrava - (sabda)
3. suciśīlajighraņa - (gandha)
4. mahâryasaddharmarasâgra-vindana – (rasa)
5. samadhisamsparśasukhānubhūti – (spțśya)
6. svabhāvagāmbhiryanayâvabodhana - (dharma)
3) Simile of ākāśa nimittabhūtatva & animittatva
25
26 c d-28
27
27 28
84.3-85.6
(V) Yoga
- Buddha is endowed with 'āveņikadharmas 'as paramārtha-
laksana.
ākāśalakşaño buddhaḥ "
(Q) on the speciality of Buddba's character
(Kärikā)
7
(= 29)
84.11-85.6
30
(Commentary)
1) Buddha is 'āśraya' of 'svaparârtha-karma'
2) Buddha's •āveộikadharmas
a) (1) acintyatā, being
1. saukşmya
agocara to śrutamayajñāna'
2. paramârtha
agocara to
cintă-m.-jñ.'
3. dharmatāgahvara
agocara to
bhāvanā-m.-jñ.'
(buddhatva is 'sarvajñajñānagocara)
31-33
[ 112 ]



The Ratna gotravibhā g a
T
С
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
472c
117 6 1-118 a l
842 a-842 c
472 c
(6) yoga
cf. JĀA
243 c etc.
Vaj C 752 a
(skt. 42-43)
816 c
117 6 3
842 6
117 6 3
842 6
[ 113 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
34
35
b) (2) nitya anutpādatā
(3) dhruva anirodbatā
(4) siva
advayatā
(5) śāśvata - dharmasthititā
c) (6) śānta
nirodhasatya
(7) vyāpi sarvâvabodhitā
(8) avikalpa apratişthānatā
(9) asakta
kleśāvaraņaprahāņa
(10) apratigha – jñeyâvaraņaprahāņa
(11) paruşasparśarahita mặdukarmaṇyabhāva
(12) adṛśya – arūpitva
(13) agrāhya animittatā
(14) śubha prakſtiśuddhatva
(15) amala
malavigamatā
36
37
(VI) Vștti
85.7-88.14
manifestation of buddhatva in the form of 3 Bodies
(Kārikās)
8-11
(= 38-
41)
(Commentary)
86.11-88.14
42
43
85.16-87.6
1) General survey of ' manifestation'
1. buddhatya is
a) sarvajñatā, b) paramanirvāṇa, c) arhattya
2. manifestation of buddhatva is in three ways: a) gāmbhīrya
(svābhāvika), b) audārya (sāmbhogika), c) māhātmya
(nairmāņika)
2)-a) the Body of the Absolute Essence
(svābhāvika) - (on K 8, 9)
1. ^5 lakşaņas ’ - (dharmadhātusvabhāva)
(1) asamskệta (anādimadhyânta)
(2) abhinna (asambhinna)
(3) advaya (antadvayavivarjita)
(4) trayâvaraṇaniḥsſta (tridhāvimukta)
(5) prabbāsvara & viśuddhi (vimalâvikalpa)
2. •5 guņas?
44
46
47
48
(1) aprameya (udāratva)
(2) asainkbya (aganyatva)
(3) acintya - (tarkasya agocaratva)
(4) asama - (kaivalyatva)
(5) viếuddhipāramiprāpti - (vāsanôcchitte”)
[ 114 ]



The Rat nag otra vibhāga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
118 a 1-119 a 3
842 c-843 b
809 a-811 a
(IV-9 avikāra)
73 a III
(7) vợtti
118 a 3-6
816 d
842 c
118 a 6
842 c-843 b
118 a 7-118 b 3
843 a
809 a-810 6
473 a
810 b-c
473 a
[ 115 ]
9



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
87.7-87.14
49
50
51
52
87.15-88.14
53-56
b) the Body of Enjoyment
(sambhogika) (on K 10)
1. two kinds of 'sambhoga'
(1) vicitradharmasambhoga - 'svasambhoga'
(2) satt vârthakriyā as karuņānişyanda – 'parasambhoga'
2. similarity to cintāmaņi' (1)
anābhoga, avikalpa, yathā'bhiprāyapūritva
3. 5 ways of manifestation
(1) desana, (2) darśana, (3) kſityâsramsana, (4) anabhi-
samskſtakriyā, (5) atatsvabhāvâkhyā
4. manifestation is not of real nature similarity to cin-
tāmaņi (2)
c) the Apparitional Body
(nairmāņika) - (on K 11)
1. Buddha as lokavit'
14 affairs of the Buddha in aparisuddhakşetra ’: 1) jāta-
kāni, 2) tuşiteşv upapatti, 3) cyutis tuşitebhyaḥ, 4) gar-
vâvakramana, 5) janman, 6) silpasthānāni kausalam,
7) antaḥpraratikſīdā, 8) naiskramya, 9) duhkhacărikā,
10) bodbimaņdāvakrānti, 11) mārasainyapramadana,
12) sambodhi, 13) dharmacakra (-pravſtti), 14) nirvā-
şâdhigamakriyā
2. Buddha as 'upāyavit'
1) śāntipathâvatāranidāna (for Hinayānists)
aversion of samsāra – anitya, duḥkha, anātman
loading to Nirvāņa – śānti
2) prapācanavyākaraḥe nidāna - (for Mahāyānists)
1. dharmatattvaprakāśana
2. uttamayāne paripācana
3. agrabodhaye vyākaraña
3) Characteristics of 'trikāya'
1. a) saukṣmya - gambhirya
gāmbhirya - svābhāvika
b) prabhāvasampatti - audārya - sambhogika
c) bālasārthâtivāhana - māhātmya - nairmāņika
2. a) dharmakāya: b) & c)= rūpakāya - (on Kll cd)
“rūpakāya' is based on 'dharmakāya', as ' rūpa'
on'ākāśa
57
58-59
60
88.11
61
(VII) Nitya
88.15-89.15
Buddha's pravștti continues
eternal.
ā bhavagateḥ', therefore, it is
[ 116 ]



The Ratnago tra vibhāga
T
с
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
118 6 3-118 6 5
843 a
om.
473 a (5 guņas)
118 6 5-119 a 3
843 2-6
810 c
473 a
119 a 2
843 b
119 a 3-119 61
843 b-c
811 a-c
473 a (III-
8 nitya)
( 117 )



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
(Kārikā)
12
(= 62)
63-67
89.3
(Commentary) - 10 points on 'eternity'
1) ‘hetvānantyatva' - saddharmasamgraha
2) 'sattvadhātvakşayatva ādipratijñā-uttaraña
3) · kāruṇya'-yogatva - karuņā-pravſtti
4) •Ịddhi'-yogatva şddhipădaprakāśa
5) ‘jñāna '-yogatva - bhavanirvāṇadvayagrahavimukti
6) 'sampatti'-yogatva samādhānasukhasampattiyogatva
7) 'dharmaîívarya’ - lokadharmair anupalepatva
8) ‘mſtyumārâvabhanga ' -- samâmộtapadaprāpti
9) 'naiḥsvābhāvya' asamskệta, ādipraśānta
10) 'śāśvata-lokanātha saraṇabhyupapatti
1)-7) eternity of 'rūpakāya'
8)-10) eternity of dharmakāya'
68
(VIII) Acintya
89.16-90.13
- āśrayaparivșttiprāptinaya is ‘of inconceivable character '.
(Kārikā)
13
(=69)
70-71
90.3
(Commentary) - 6 points on 'acintya'
' acintya' 1) anabhilāpya (avākyavattva) - 2) paramâr-
tha 3) atarkya 4) vyupameya – 5) anuttara – 6) anud-
graha (in either samsāra or nirvāņa)
1)-5) inconceivability of dharmakāya'
6) inconceivability of “rūpakāya'
Buddha's final stage is not accessible to Bodhisattvas of the
highest rank (abhişekalabdhā bodhisattvāḥ)
72
73
(Colophon) for Chapter II
90.14-15
Chapter III
The Properties of the Buddha
91-97
(III Buddha-Guņāḥ)
tur
guņa. dharma, buddhadharma (VP 6) (RG III)
XIV. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE BUDDHA'S PROPERTIES
91.2-91.13
(Kärikā)
III. 1
(= 1)
[ 118 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāg a
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
816 C
843 b
119 a 4
119 6 1-119 6 5 843
810 c
473 b (III-10)
acintya
816 c-817 a
843 c
om.
probably a
Quotation
(unk.)
119 b 5
119 b 6-122 a l
843 c-845 c
cf. RDS DRS
473 c-475 c
(IV guņa)
119 b 6-120 a 1
843 c-844 a
817 a
844 a
[ 119 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
2-3
(Commentary)
a) adyam dharmakāya b) dvitīyam - rūpakāya
1. paramārthakāya (pāramarthika) samvștikāya (sāmketika)
2. svârthasampattyadhişthāna parârthasampattyadhişthāna
3. visamyoga-phala
vipāka-phala
4. (endowed with)
10 balas, 4 vaiśāradhyas
32 mahāpuruşalakşaņas
18 äveņikadharmas
XV, 64. PROPERTIES OF THE BUDDHA
91.14-97.14
(Kārikās)
Summary
2
(=4)
(I) The 10 Powers
3-4
(=5-6)
91.19-92.7
buddha
balânvita
jñānabala of
1. sthānâsthāna , 2. karmavipāka, 3. indriya, 4. dhātu,
5. adhimukti, 6. márga sarvatragāminī, 7. dhyānâdi-klesa-
vaimalya, 8. nivāsânusmộti, 9. divyācakşus, 10. śānti (=
āsravakşaya).
en
(=7)
92.8-93.2
6-7
(=8-9)
Simile of 'vajra'
balas do pierce the armour', 'break the fortress'. and
cut down the tree' of ajñāna
(II) The 4 Forms of Intrepidity
buddha caturvaiśāradyaprāpta
vaiſāradya (astambhitatva) in
1. sarvadharmâbhisambodhi jñāna & jñāpana on jñeya
2. vibandhapratişedha (hāni &) bānikāraṇakſti on heya
3. mārgâkhyāna – (seva &) sevana on sevya
4. nirodhâpti prāpta & prāpana on prāptavya
Simile of ‘simha'
Among parişat, buddha is 'svastha, nirāstha, sthira, & vikra-
mastha'.
8
(= 10)
93.3-94.7
(III) The 18 Exclusive Properties
buddha aştādaśâveņikabuddhadharmasamanvāgata
1. nāsti skhalitam, 2. násti ravaḥ, 3. n. musitā smrtiḥ, 4. n. asa-
māhitacittam, 5. n. nānātvasamjñitā, 6. n. upekņā pratisam-
9-13
(=11-15)
[ 120 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
T
С
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
120 a 2-122 a 1
844 a-845 c
817 a
844 a
120 a 3-120 a 5
475 6
-
844 a
817 a
844 a
cf.
RDS 34 a-6
DRS 14 c-18 a
817 a
845 a
120 a 5-120 6 1
844 b
475 b
cf. RDS 34 b
DRS 18 a-19 a
1 817 a-6
844 a-6
817 b
845 a
120 b 1-120 6 6
844 b
475 b
cf. RDS 346 35 c
DRS 19 a-21 6
8176
844 6
[ 121 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
14
(=16)
94.8-96.2
15-23
(=17-25)
khyāyām, 7. n. chandasya hāniḥ, 8. n. vīryataḥ h., 9. n.
smộteḥ h., 10. n. prajñāyā h., 11. n. vimukter h., 12. n. vi-
muktijñānadarśanāt h., 13-15. jñānapūrvamgamam karma-
trayam, 16–18, tryadhvajñānam anāvſtam.
Simile of 'ākāśa'
As ‘space' has no nature in common with other materials, Bud-
dha has 'exclusive nature' not in common with those worlds.
(IV) The 32 Marks of the Superman
buddha dvātriņśanmahāpuruşalakşaņarūpadhārin
1. supratişghita-cakrâökavyāyata-utsarga-pādatā 2. dirgā-
ngulikatā 3. jālapāņipādâvanaddhatā 4. tvarmțdusritaru-
Ⓡatā 5. saptôtsada-sariratā 6. eņeyajanghatā 7. nāgakośava-
dvastiguhyatā 8. simhapūrvârdhakāyatva 9. nirantaracitâm-
śatā (antarāņģa ?) 10. samvșttaskandhatā 11. vịttaślakṣaṇâ-
nunnāmabāhutā 12. pralambhabhāhutā 13. śuddhaprabhā-
maņdalagātratā 14. kambugrivatvam, amalam 15. mſgendra-
hanutā 16. samā catvārimśaddasanatā 17. svacchâvirara-
dantatā 18. visuddha-sama-dantatva 19. śuklapravaradam-
stratā 20. prabhūtajihvatā 21. anantâcintyarasarasâgratā
22. kalavinkaruta 23. brahmasvaratā 24. nīlôtpalaśrī-vşşa-
pakşma-netra 25. sitâmala-ūệnôdita-cāruvaktra
26. uşņişa-
śīrṣa 27. vyavadātasūkşma-suvarṇavarņa-cihavi 28. ekai-
kavislista-mrdu-ūrdhva-dehapradakşiņâvarta-susūksma-roma
29. mahendranilâmalaratna-keśa 30. nyagrodhapūrņadruma-
maņdalâbhā 31. nārāyaṇasthāmadşdhâtmabhāva 32. saman-
tabhadra, apratima (ātmabhāva) ?
Simile of dakacandra'
24
(=26)
96.3-97.14
27
28
2 rūpakāyas are like the moon and its reflection in the pond.
(Commentary)
1) 64 properties are taken from the Ratnadārikāsūtra
2) Point of similarity (udāharaṇa-piņdârtha)
General:
(I) vajravat nirvedhika; (II) simhavat nirdainya
(III) ākāśavat – kaivalya; (IV) dakacandravat niriha.
(I) vajravat: bala is 'guru, sāra, dệdha & abhedya'
1st-6th bala - jñeyāvaraņaprahāņa - piercing armour
7th-9th bala samāpattyāvaraņa-p. – breaking wall
10th bala savāsanakleśâvaraṇa-p. cutting down tree
(II) simhavat: (because of)
1. nirbhayatya obtaining of 'sarvâbhijñā'
2. nirāsthatva no superiority-complex
29-31
-
32-34
[ 122 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
T
С
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
817 b-C
845 6
120 6 6-121 a 6
844 b-c
475 6
cf. RDS 36a
40 6
AA+AAĀ chap
VIII etc.
817 c
844 6-c
817 c-818 a
845 b
121 a 6-122 a 1
844 c-845 c
[ 123 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
35-37
3. sthairyatva obtaining cittasamādhāna'
4. vikramasampad 'avidyāvāsabhūmivyatikrānta'
(III) ākāśavat:
přthagjana, śrāvaka, pratyekabuddha, bodhisattva are like
prthivi and the rest, but buddha is like ākāśa being of the
subtlest Intellect.
(1)-(III) - similes for · dharmakāya'
(IV) dakacandravat: simile for rūpakāya'
sambhogakāya – in buddhamandala (bimba ?)
nairmāņika - in this world (pratibimba)
(Colophon) for Chapter III
38-39
97.15-16
98.1-114
Chapter IV. The acts of the Buddha
(IV. Jinakriyā) (VP 7) (RG IV)
karman, tathāgatakſtyakriyā, buddhakarman
XVI. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ACTS OF THE BUDDHA
98.1-99.14
1,2
(=1-2)
98.12-99.14
3-4
5-12
(Kärikās)
(Commentary)
a) 'anābhogatā' of vinayakriyā (on K. 1)
1. 'yasya' - vineyadhātu ; 2. 'yena vinayôpāya
3. " yāvat' & 4. 'yadā tad deśakālagamane
b) “apratipraśrabdhatā (or avikalpatā)' of vinayakriyā (on K. 2)
(6 points) (subject) (simile) (point of simile)
1. niryāņa da sabhūmi mahôdadhi jñānâmbu-
(yāna)
gunaratna
2. upastambha sambhāradvaya rayi
saryasattva-
(hetu)
(punya- &
upajivyatva
of niryāņa
jñāna-)
3. phala of
paramabodhi
vyoman vipulânanta-
samsāra (buddhatva)
madhya
4. parigraha sarvasattva nidhāna samyaksam-
of bodhi
buddhadhar-
matva
5. Āvști on kleśāḥ(klesa ambuda āgantuka,
sattvadhātu & jñeyâvaraņa)
vyāpi, ani-
spatti
6. ucchitti-pra. karuņā
vāyu
āvſtikşipti-
tyaya of ävſti
pratyupas-
thāna
[ 124 ]



The Ratna gotravibhag a
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AAS
122 a 1
122 a 1-127 b 4
845 c-846 c
chap. V Tatha.
gatakştyakriya-
parivarta (but
the content is
different)
122 a 1-122 6 %
845 c-846 a
122 a 2-122 a 4
818 a
845 c (C. 1.2*)
845 c-846 a
122 a 4-122 b 2
• Karikā number in C.
[ 125 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
99.15-114.2
99.15-20
co
(=13)
100.3-102.4
4-16
17. 18
(=]4-26)
(=27-28)
19-20
(=29-30)
102.5-104.16
21-23
& 24
(=31-33)
(=34)
25
(=35)
36-40
102.20-
104.12
XVII. THE 9 ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE BUDDHA'S ACTS
§ 1. Buddha's Magnanimity (māhātmya) – (General statement)
(Kārikā) tathāgata is like sakra', etc. in his acts
§ 2. 9 Illustrations taken from the Jñānâlokâlankārasūtra
(Kārikās)
(I) sakrapratibhāsavat
1. Just as the appearance of Indra appears on the surface of
pure Vaidurya-stone, the Buddha's form appears on the
purc
mind of the living beings
2. Appearance of image is due to the condition of 'svacitta'
(II) devadundubhivat
1. Just as devadundubhi' arises from “svakarman’ of gods,
'dharmadundubhi', the Buddha's voice, arises from svakar-
man' of 'sattva'
2. dharmadundubhi' alarms and encourages sattvas by the
sound of 'anitya-duḥkha-anātma-śānta
3. On the superiority of the drum to other musical instruments
1) advantages of dharmadundubhiº
1. aprādesikatva, 2. hitatva, 3. sukhatva, 4. nairyāṇikatva
2) '3 prātihāryas '
(1. Țddhi, 2. ādeśana, 3. anuśāsti)
4. Buddha's voice is sometimes not audible because of the
self-fault of sattvas (ātmâparādha of atatprahitas)
(III) meghavat
1. Just as clouds discharge the rain and cause hervest, the
Buddha discharges saddharma' on sattvas
2. Unequality of receptacles in measure (bhājana-vimātratā)
3. The impartial attitude of the Buddha in discharging of the
doctrine (nirapekṣapravștti)
4. Functions of calming the fire of ' duḥkha' (duhkhâgni -
1) duḥkha jñeya
prásamana)
2) duḥkha-hetu heya
3) duḥkha-nirodha sparsitavya
4) mārga (towards duḥkhanirodha) nişevya
(IV) mahābrahmavat
1. Just as Brahmā, without moving from his place, shows his
form, similarly the Buddha, without moving from 'dharma-
kāya', shows his various ‘nirmāņakāya' before the people.
2. Invisibility of the Apparitional form to some people
(anābhāsagamana).
26
(=41)
104.12
104.17-
106.19
27, 28
(=42, 43)
& 29, 30(=44, 45)
31
(=46)
32-34 (=47–49)
105.11
105.16
35-37
(=50-52)
106.7
107.1-107.18
38-39
&
40-41
(=53,54)
(=55,56)
42
(=57)
[ 126 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
122 b 3-127 b 4
846 a-846 c
122 b 3-5
846 a
818 a
846 a (C3)
122 b 5-123 b 2
cf. JĀA 240 b-c
om.
818 b (C 6, 7)
818 a-6
(C 4, 5)
123 b 2-124 b 4
cf. JĀA 241 a
om.
818 b (C 12)
818 c (C 13)
123 6 6-124 b 2
om.
124 b 3
818 c (C 14)
124 b 4-125 a 6
cf. JĀA 241 b-c
om.
818 c
(C 16, 15)
818 c (C 17)
818 c-819 a
(C 18–21)* C 19
is not in S & T
819 a (C 23
24.22)
125 a 6-125 b 3
cf. JĀA 242 a
om.
819 a
(C 26.25)
819 a-b (C 27)
[ 127 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
107.19-
109.13
(=58)
59-62
108.3-14
(V) sūryavat
1. Just as the sun shines at once, causing blossoming of padma 43
and closing of kumuda, the Buddha's shine makes to perish
dosa' and nourishes
guņa'
2. Two kinds of people compared to water-born flowers (vineya
is svacchajalabhājanavat)
3. The order of sattvas on account of their receiving the Buddha's 44, 45
teaching (darsanādeśanāpravịttikrama)
4. The superiority of the Buddha's light to that of the sun 46, 47
(prabhāmaņdala--viseşana)
(=63, 64)
(=65, 66)
109.14-110.7
(=67-69)
(VI) cintāmaṇivat
1. Like cintāmaņi, the Buddha fulfils the wishes of the people 48, 50
according to their merits, but he has neither ‘vikalpa' nor
*ābhoga
2. durlabhatya' of the Buddha
51
(VII) prati śrutkāśabdhavat
The Buddha's voice is, like echoes, parapratyayasambhava'
52, 53
(VIII) ākāśavat
54-55
Like space, the Buddha is invisible, immaterial
(=70)
110.8-12
(=71, 72)
(=73, 74)
110.13-
110.17
110.18-22
(IX) ppthiviyat
The Buddha is, like the earth, the ground of all the virtues.
56-57
(=75, 76)
111.1-17
77-79
80-81
>
§ 3. Summary of the Illustrations given by the Commentator
1. the purpose of illustration sarvabuddhavişayâvatāra-
jñānâlokálankāra "
2. meaning of the 9 examples (point of similarity)
(I) darśanā '- sakra (II) 'deśanā’- dundubhi (III) * vyāpi'-
megha (IV) 'vikſti’ - Brahmā (V) ‘jñānaniḥsști ’- sūrya
(VI) .mano-guhya cintamani (VII)“ vāg-guhya'.
pratiśruti (VIII) ‘kāya-gubya' ākāśa (XI) präpti'
(buddhabhūmi) - ppthivi
3. Syllogism:
pratijñā; anābhogaśāntā buddhakriyāḥ
hetu: dhinirvikalpatvāt
dịştānta: sakrâdivat
(prakſtârtha: darśanadi-navadho’rthah)
§ 4. Summary of Examples given in the Kārikās
§ 5. Non-origination and Non-extinction of the Buddbahood
(anutpădânirodhas tathāgatadharmakāyaḥ)
82-84
58-61
(=85–88)
112.1-17
112.18
-113.4
89-91
( 128 )



The Ratnagotravibhā ga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
125 b 3-126 a 4
cf. JĀA 242 6
819 b (C 28)
125 b 4-7
om.
819 b (C 29)
(om. K 44)
819 b (C 30-32)
(C 30 is not
in S & T)
126 a 4-126 a 7
cf. JĀA 242 a
819 c
(C 33.34)
om. K 50
om.
126 a 7-126 6 1
cf. JĀA 243 b
126 b 1-2
819c
(C 35.36)
819 c
(C 37.38)
cf. JĀA 243 c
(after prthivivat)
126 b
cf. JĀA 243 c
819 c
(C 39.40)
846 6
126 b 3-126 67
127 a 1-127 a 4
819 c (C 41)
om. v. 85-87
127 a 4-127 a 6
818 b (C 8-11)
*C 8 is an addi-
tion
[ 129 ]



J. TAKASAKI
K
V
S
113.5-114.2
92-98
$ 6. The Point of Dissimilarity
(Dissimilarity of each example with the Buddha's act is removed
by the succeeding one, respectively).
(I) aghoşavat (II) na sarvathā'rthakrt (III) na sārthabījavat
(IV) na atyantapācaka (V) na atyantatamo'paha (VI) na
durlabhôdaya (VII) na pratyayasambhava (VIII) na śu-
klâspada (IX) přthivī, being 'āspada', is the best example (?)
(Colophon) for Chapter IV
114.3-4
Chapter V. - The Merits of Faith (adhimuktyanuśamsa)
115-119
XVIII. THE MERITS OF HAVING FAITH IN THE DOCTRINE OF THE
ESSENCE OF BUDDHAHOOD
115.1-117.4
1 -6
(=1-6
7
8-12
§ 1. The Superiority of Faith to other Virtues in regard of their
Merits
(Kārikās)
(Commentary)
1) acintyatā of buddhavişaya in its 4 aspects (on K 1)
(I) buddhadhātu - āśraya
(II) buddhabodhi (āśrayasya) parāvșttiḥ
(III) buddhaguņāḥ - (āśrayaparivịtter) guņāḥ
(IV) buddhakrtya arthasādhana
2) adhimukti of bodhisattva the rise of bodhicitta' (on K 2)
śraddhā-adhimukti on:
astitva' (of dhātu)
śaktatva' (of dhātu to attain bodbi)
guṇavattva' (buddhadhrmâvinirbhāgatā of dhātu)
resulting in
* pūri' - trimaņdalâvikalpa
punyapāramitā pariſuddhi' - vipakşaprahāņa
3) puṇyapāramitā and prajñāpāramitā; the superiority of the
latter (on K 3-6)
(1) dāna (K 3)
(4) vīrya
(K 4)
(common to all)
dhyāna (K 5), (3) kşānti
puņyapāramitā
(bhāvanā)
1 (5) dhyāna
(6) prajñā - (K 6) - the basis of puṇyapāramitā
4) śruti + adhimukti + prajñā.
therefore, śruti is the basis of all – (K 6)
13-14
(2) sila
15
[ 130 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
T
С
Q. & R.
BGś
DAS
AĀS
127 a 6-127 6 3
846 b-c
C adds one
verse more at
the end
127 6 3
127 b 4-129 a 5
846 c-848 a
127 b 4-128 b 1
846 c-847 b
819 c-820 a
846 0-847 a
cf. MSbh (P)
194 b, 200C
799 C
812c-813 a
[ 131 ]
10



J. TAKASAKI
K
S
117.5-118.2
§ 2. Authority, Motive, and Characteristics of this Text being
the Correct Doctrine
(Kárikās)
1) basis (yataḥ) - āptâgama & yukti
7
(=16)
2) motive (yannimittam)
a) atmaśuddhi, b) kusalasampat-sattvânugraha
3) how ? (yathā) – by the light of muniprabhākara
8
(=17)
4) characteristics (yad)
9
(=18)
qualification of ‘ärşa-vacas
1. arthavaddharmapadôpasamhita
2. tridhātusaņklesanibarhana
3. śāntyanusamsadarśaka
5) means of explanation (yena) (yannięyanda-phala)
10
(=19)
6
11-12
qualification of this treatise as being similar to ārşa-vacas
§ 3. Means of Preserving oneself within the Doctrine (ātmarak-
şanôpāya) - purification of the mind
§ 4. Causes and Results of the Loss of the Doctrine
(=20-21) 118.3–118.10
118.11-119.4
13
(=22)
a) dharmakşati-hetu 1. dhī-māndya, 2. adhimuktaśukla-
viraha, 3. mithyā'bhimānâśraya, 4. saddharmavyasa-
nâvștâtmaka 5. neyârthatattvagraha, 6. lobhagredhatā,
7. (mithyā-)darśana, 8. dharmadvişa-sevana, 9. dhar-
mabhțd-āra, 10. hina(-yāna)-ruci
b) dharmakşati-phala
14-15
(=23,24)
dharmakşati' is the worst sin which leads one to Avici.
It is worse than '5 ānantaryāṇi'
§ 5. Conclusion
16
(=25)
119.5-15
dharmârthavādasya phala (āptapuṇya-pariņamana) samsā-
ramandala-kşānti & bodhy-āpti
puộya-āpti' by teaching sapta-arthapada' (= 7 vajrapadas)
* pariņamana' of punya
Let the people perceive the Lord Amitāyus and get pa-
ramabodhi'
(Commentary)
Summary of topics discussed in § 2.- 5. (on KK 7-16)
(Colophon) for Chapter V
26-28
119.16-17
( 132 ]



The Rat nag otra vibhāga
T
C
Q. & R.
BGS
DAS
AĀS
128 b 1-128 b 4
847 b
cf. MSbh (P)
270 a-b
(=vv. 16–25)
820 a
847 b
820 a-b
847 b
820 6
847 6
820 6
847 b
847 c
128 b 4-128 6 6
820 6
128 b 6-129 a 2
847 c
820 6
847 c
820 6
847 c
C adds. one
verse before
V. 26
129 a 2-129 a 5
848 a
820 c
cf. MSbb (P)
270 6
vv. 26–28)
129 a 5, 6–7
[ 133 ]



TRANSLATION



TABLE OF CONTENTS
(for Translation & Notes thereon)
Chapter I.
THE MATRIX OF THE TATHĀGATA
PAGB
1.
141
Introduction
1) The Meaning of the Adamantine Subjects
2) Authorities on the 7 Subjects
3) The Essential Character of the 7 Subjects
4) The Inherent Connection among the 7 Subjects
141
143
146
153
II.
155
The Jewel of the Buddha
1) The eightfold Quality of the Buddhahood.
2) Reference to the Jñānâlokâlankārasūtra
156
159
III.
163
.
The Jewel of the Doctrine
1) The Eightfold Quality of the Doctrine
2) Nirodhasatya & Mārgasatya
3) The Doctrine as the Truth of Extinction
4) The Doctrine as the Truth of Path
164
165
165
168
IV.
172
.
The Jewel of the Community.
1) Manner and Extent of Perception
a) Right Manner of Perception
b) Unlimited Extent of Perception
2) Introspective Character of Bodhisattva's Perception
3) Superiority of Bodhisattva's Community
173
174
175
176
176
.
V.
180
.
.
.
The 3 Jewels as Refuges
1) 3 Refuges from the Empirical Standpoint
2) The Doctrine and the Community are not the ultimate refuge
3) Only the Buddha is the Refuge from the ultimate Standpoint
4) The Meaning of the 3 Jewels
180
181
184
185
.
•
VI.
186
The Germ of the 3 Jewels in 4 Aspects
1) Inconceivability of the 4 Aspects .
2) The Germ as Cause and Conditions of the 3 Jewels in its 4 Aspects
188
194
VII.
The Sermon: All Living Beings are possessed of the Tathāgatagarbha
[ 137 ]



J. TAKASAKI
PAGE
199
VIII. Analysis of the Germ from 10 Points of View
(I) Svabhāva & (II) Hetu
1) The Nature of the Essence of the Tathāgata
2) Obstructions and Causes for Purification
200
0
.
200
201
(III)
.
207
208
.
.
Phala & (IV) Karman.
1) The 4 Supreme Virtues as the Result of Purification
2) Concordance between the 4 Supreme Virtues and the 4 Causes for Pu-
rification
3) 4 Impediments to the Attainment of the Supreme Virtues
4) Motives of the 4 Supreme Virtues
4') The Unstable Nirvāņa
5) Functions of the Germ for its Purification
.
210
214
218
219
221
0
.
(V)
225
Yoga .
1) The Union of the Germ to the Factors of its Purification
2) The Union of the Germ to the Result of Purification
225
227
(VI) Vștti (Manifestation).
229
(VII) Avasthāprabheda (Different States of Manifestation)
230
(VIII) Sarvatraga (All-pervadingness)
233
.
234
235
238
241
(IX) Avikāra
(A) Unchangeability in the Impure State
1) Unoriginated Character of the Innate Mind .
2) Indestructible Character of the Innate Mind
(B) Unchangeability in the Pure-and-impure State
1) Pure Character and Impure Character of the Bodhisattva
2) Defilements endowed with the Virtuous Root
3) Bodhisattva's Compassion The Parable of a Householder
4) Bodhisattva's Perception of the Pure Mind
5) 'Samsāra' in the Case of Bodhisattva
6) Bodhisattva in his 6th Stage
7) The Pure and Impure State of the Bodhisattva in comparison with the
Ordinary Being and the Buddha
(C) Unchangeability in the Perfectly Pure State .
243
243
245
246
248
250
250
.
O
.
.
253
.
256
(X)
258
Asambheda
1) Synonyms of the Essence of the Tathāgata
2) The Point: Buddhahood is Nirvāṇa
3) The Parable of Painters
4) Similarity of the Buddhahood to the Sun
259
261
263
265
268
IX, The 9 Illustrations on the Germ covered with Defilements
1) The 9 Illustrations according to the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra
2) 9 Kinds of Defilements the Impurities of the Mind
3) Concordance between the 9 Illustrations and 9 Kinds of Defilements
268
277
281
.
[ 138 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
PAGE
283
.
284
4) The threefold Nature of the Essence
a) Dharmakāya
b) Tathatā
c) Tathāgatagotra
287
288
X.
294
.
.
.
The Essential Characteristics of the Matrix of the Tathāgata
1) The Saying: * All Living Beings are possessed of the Matrix of the
Tathāgata’ is the Highest Logical Truth.
2) The 4 Kinds of Individuals to whom the Faith in this Essence is necessary
3) The True Conception of the Matrix of the Tathāgata as representing
Non-substantiality.
294
296
300
XI.
The Purpose of Instruction
305
Chapter II. – THE ENLIGHTENMENT
XII.
General Characteristics of the Reality free from Pollutions
310
.
314
314
.
315
318
322
XIII. 8 Points on the Undefiled Reality
(I) Svabhāva & (II) Hetu
(III) Phala
(IV)
Karman
(V) Yoga .
(VI)
Vștti
a) The Body of the Absolute Essence
b) The Body of Enjoyment
c) The Apparitional Body
(VII) Nitya
(VIII) Acintya
324
.
326
328
329
331
.
334
Chapter III. -
THE PROPERTIES OF THE BUDDHA
XIV.
General Characteristics of the Buddha's Properties
.
336
XV.
The 64 Properties of the Buddha
338
338
339
(I) The 10 Powers
(II) The 4 Forms of Intrepidity
(III) The 18 Exclusive Properties
(IV) The 32 Marks of the Superman
(Commentary)
341
343
347
[ 139 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Chapter IV.
THE ACTS OF THE BUDDHA
PAGE
XVI.
General Characteristics of the Acts of the Buddha
351
.
XVII. The 9 Illustrations on the Buddha's Acts
355
.
1) Buddha's Magnanimity.
2) The 9 Illustrations taken from the Jñānâlokalarkārasūtra
3) Summary of the Illustrations given by the Commentator
4) Summary of Examples given in the Kārikās
5) Non-origination and Non-extinction of the Buddhahood
6) The Point of Dissimilarity
355
356
374
375
377
377
Chapter V. -
THE MERITS OF FAITH
XVIII. The Merits of Having Faith in the Doctrine of the Essence of Buddhahood 380
1) The Superiority of Faith to other Virtues in regard to their Merits . . 380
2) Authority, Motive, and Characteristics of this Text being the Correct
Doctrine
384
3) Means of preserving oneself within the Doctrine
386
4) Causes and Results of the Loss of the Doctrine
387
5) Conclusion
389
[ 140 ]



ANALYSIS OF THE GERM OF THE JEWELS 1)
(A Treatise on the Ultimate Doctrine of the Great Vehicle) 2)
CHAPTER I.
THE MATRIX OF THE TATHAGATA
(Salutation)
I bow to the Saint Vajrasattva 3).
I. INTRODUCTION - The 7 Vajrapadas
§ 1. The Meaning of the 7 Vajrapadas.
The Buddha, the Doctrine, and the Community 4),
The Essence [of the Buddha) 5), the Supreme Enlightenment 6),
The Virtuous Qualities [of the Buddha),
And, last of all, the Act of the Buddha;
These are the 7 Adamantine Subjects, [which show]
Briefly, the body of the whole text. || 1 ||
80 on.
1) Ratnagotravibhāga. The word 'vibhāga ’ is the correct Skt. form of Pālió vibhanga'
which means explanation', 'commentary. In BHS, however, the form 'vibhanga
is more often used as in cases of Madhyântavibhanga, Dharmadharmatā-vibhanga and
In these cases, vibhanga' is taken in the sense of distinction between two'.
But here, the meaning 'analysis ’ seems more suitable, because the word 'ratnagotra'
indicates · dhātu' or ' tathāgatagarbha’, and not ratna & gotra'. Cf. gotram ratnatrayasya
S. p. 21.6.
2) Mahāyāna-uttaratantra-śāstra. About the title, see my Introduction, Chap. I.
3) T. offers salutation to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas C.om. the salutation,
but has 18 verses instead before entering the main text. This salutation to Vajrasattva,
who has an important rôle in the Tantric Buddhism, does not match with this text which
has no connection with Tantrism in its doctrine, in spite of the use of the word 'tantra'
in the title. Probably this is a salutation made by the copyist of the present Skt. text
under the influence of later Tantric Buddhism.
4) gana, T. tshogs, c. 1 (= sangha).
5) dhātu, T. khams, C. .
) bodhi, T. byar-chub, c. v.
[ 141 ]



J. TAKASAKI
The word “ vajrapada ' (adamantine subject) ?) means the term (pada),
i.e. the basis (sthāna), which expresses the meaning of the Enlightenment
(adhigama) which is similar to a thunderbolt (or diamond] (vajra). Here, it
being difficult to be penetrated 8) by the knowledge consisting in studying
and thinking, the meaning [of the Enlightenment] which is not capable
of being explained but is to be realized by oneself 9), should be understood
as like a thunderbolt'. Those letters, which express that meaning by
making manifest the way which is favourable for its acquisition, are called
'pada', just because they are the basis of that meaning. Thus, by
both meanings, i.e. being hard to be penetrated and being the basis, the
character of 'vajrapada', of the meaning as well as of the letters, is to
be understood.
Now, what is "artha' (the meaning) and what is ‘vyañjana' (the
letter)? “ Artha' is the sevenfold meaning of the Enlightenment, viz.
1) the Buddha (buddha), 2) the Doctrine (dharma), 3) the Community
(samgha), 4) the Essence of the Buddha (dhātu) 10), 5) the Supreme Enlighten-
ment (bodhi), 6) the Virtuous Qualities of the Buddha (guņa), and 7) the
Acts of the Buddha (karman) 11). These are called “artha ’12). The
letters, by which this sevenfold meaning of the Enlightenment is indicated
or is manifested, are called vyañjana '13). And this teaching of " vajra-
pada ’ should be understood in detail according to the Sūtras.
9)
7) T. rdo-rje gnas,
C.
. h A.
8) prativedha, T. phigs-pa (to make a small hole, to penetrate).
) pratyātma-vedaniya, T. so-so-ran-bshin rig-par bya-ba, C. H .
10) C. (= sattva).
11) For these 7 subjects, T. & C. give the following terms: 1) sans-rgyas,
Tele;
2) chos, #; 3) dge-hdun, 1979; 4) khams, jo ); 5) byan-chub,
XG);
6) yon-tan, TJ Monte
7) phyin-las, X.
12) C. adds here the following scriptural passage: " - * *
(paramârtha sarya) FT , 'U ** TH THE EN, JOS R* aj”.
13) Instead of this sentence, C. puts the following one: · FT *, DI
何等名字,
章句 (phrase), 言語(word),風聲(sound), 能表 (expresion),
能說(description),能明(explanation), 能示 (indication),此七種義,
*"
And it adds the following scriptural passage: "(samortisatya) ,
* T W Ż$,*,a
,, ET ”.
These two passages are quoted from the Akşayamati-parivarta (c.,
THE MË, Taisho, XIII, p. 197 b).
[142]



The Rat na gotra vibhāga
§ 2.
Authorities on the 7 Subjects.
1) · Buddha ': “ Verily, 0 Ananda, invisible is the Tathāgata. He
cannot be seen by eyes ”.
2) · Dharma ': “Verily, 0 Ananda, unutterable is the Doctrine.
cannot be heard by ears
3) “Samgha ’: “ Verily, 0 Ananda, the Holy Community is of an
immutable 14) character. It cannot be completely served, either by body
or by mind ”.
These are the [first] 3 vajrapadas, which are to be understood accord-
ing to the Drdhâdhyāśaya-parivarta 15).
4) · Dhātu ’: “ Verily, O Śāriputra, this meaning is a subject for the
Tathāgata [and only belongs to] the sphere of the Tathāgata. This
meaning, O Śāriputra, can neither be known 16) nor be seen, nor be ex-
amined correctly throngh the knowledge of the Śrāvakas and the Pratye-
kabuddhas. Needless to say, this applies to the case of ignorant and ordi-
nary beings, except when they have faith 17) in the Tathāgata. O Śā-
riputra, the ultimate truth is really approachable only by faith [in the
Tathāgata). O Śāriputra, the ultimate Truth is a synonym of the mass
of living beings (sattva-dhātu) 18). The mass of living beings is, o Śā-
riputra, nothing but a synonym of the Matrix of the Tathāgata (tathā-
gatagarbha) 19). The Matrix of the Tathāgata is, Śāriputra, nothing but
a synonym of the Absolute Body (dharmakāya)".
14) asam skrta, T. ḥdus-ma-byas-pa, C. THE , Lit. “ being not created by causes
and conditions, or not caused by sami skāras (the active forces) ’, i. e. ' not belonging
to this Phenomenal World '.
15) T. Lhag-paḥi bsam-pa bstan-pași leņu. Here, 'brtan-pa’ is preferable to 'bstan-
pa'. Cf. Tohoku No. 224 which gives the Skt title; Sthirâdhyāśaya-parivarta. This
sūtra is lacking in Chinese Tripitaka.
16) According to T., 'jñātum vā’ should be supplied after svaprajñayā' (T. śes-pa).
17) śraddhā-gamana, T. dad-pas rtogs-pa. As for the importance of faith, see
S. p. 74 1. 1 f. (v. I. 153).
18) T. sems-can-gyi khams, c. 4 , Here dhātu means “a group' (jāti or
gotra) and sattvadhātu is used as a collective noun for sattvas. At the same time, however,
this word, being synonymous with tathāgatagarbha, may be interpreted as “the Essence
of the sattva, being the “ cause of the Buddhahood”, according to the special use of the
word dhātu' in this text.
10) T. de-bshin-gśegs-pași sñin-po, c. kp . The meaning of tathāgatagarbha
will be discussed under (VII) & (IX) – 4) (in Chap. I) (S. p. 26, 70 ff.).
[ 143 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Thus is the fourth vajrapada' and is to be understood according
to the Anūnatvâpurņatvanirdesa-parivarta 20).
5) Bodhi': “O Lord, the Supreme Perfect Enlightenment (anuttarā
samyaksambodhi) is a synonym of the Sphere of the Nirvāņa 21). The
Sphere of the Nirvāṇa is nothing but a synonym of the Absolute Body
of the Tathāgata ”.
Thus is the fifth Vajrapada which is to be understood according to
the Ārya Śrīmālā-sūtra 22).
6) Guna': “O Sāriputra, that which is called the Absolute Body,
preached by the Tathāgata, is of indivisible nature, of qualities insepa-
rable from the Wisdom, that is to say, [indivisible from or endowed] with
the properties of the Buddha which far surpass the particles of sands
of the Gangā in number ” 23).
20) c. 7 TetorTaisho, No. 668, XVI, 467 a. T. has no translation of
this sūtra. Hereafter, AAN will be used as the abbreviation.
21) nirvāṇadhātu, T. mya-nan-las-ḥdas-pahi dbyins, c. 7. T. dbyins
(for dhātu) means a heavenly region'. “ bhagavan' in the Text is, to be corrected
into ' bhagavams'.
22) Śrimālādevisimhanāda-sūtra. T. Hphags-pa dpal-phren-gi mdo (Dpal-phren
lha-mo ser-geħi sgraḥi modo) c. . There are two translations in C.:
1)勝靈師子吼一乘大方便方廣經 tr. by 求那跋陀羅
(Guņabhadra), Taisho, No. 353. and 2) *, vol. 48 of
the
(Ratnakūța-sūtra), Taisho, No. 310. Hereafter the first one will be used as the reference
under the abbreviation of ŚMS. This passage, ŚMS, Taisho, XII, 220 c.
23) The whole quotation runs as follows:
(S.) yo'yam, Sāriputra, tathagatanirdişto dharmakāyaḥ, so'yam avinirbhāgadhar-
mā, avinirmuktajñānaguņo, yaduta, gangānadi-vālikā-výatikrāntais tathāgatadharmaih;
(T.) Śāri-bu, de-bshin-gśegs-pas bstan-pahi chos-kyi sku gan-yin-pa de-ni ḥdi-
Ita-ste, gangāḥi klun-gi bye-ma-sñed-las ḥdas-paḥi de-bshin-gśegs-paủi chos-dag-dan /
rnam-par dbyer-med-paủi chos dan ldan-pa, ma-bral-baħi ye-ses-kyi yon-tan-can yin-no.
(C.) FU #, ko * T , HA ET ME
The ti ko * Th (C. has a longer quo-
tation, but its additional part is identical with the quotation in S. p. 39 from the
same sūtra).
For "avinirbhāgadharman' ("-dharman', ifc. of the nature of '), T. rnam-par
dbyer-med-paại cho daň Idan-pa (= ... chos-can), C. simply 7 € and om. *dhar-
man' (usually,
TEX.
For ‘avinirmuktajñānaguņa', T. ma-bral-baħi ye-ses-kyi yon-tan-can, which does
correct (it should be ye-ses-dan ma-bral-baħi yon-tan can'); C. T
[ 144 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
This is the sixth Vajrapada and is to be understood according to
the Anūnatvâpūrņatvanirdeśa 24).
7) • Karman ’: “ O Mañjusri, the Tathāgata never imagines anything
nor distinguishes falsely. That is to say, his acts of this kind flow
forth without any effort, without any imagination or any thought
construction”.
This is the seventh Vajrapada which is to be understood according
to the Tathāgatagunajñānâcintyavisayâvatāra-nirdeśa 25).
In short, these are the 7 Vajrapadas which should be known as the
body of this whole text, in the sense of being a collection of preliminary
explanations 26).
脱.... 智慧功德,but 智慧功德 is placed at the end, and prohably
or
seem
sense
the whole sentense could not be understood properly by C. translator. The term 'avi-
nirmuktajñānaguņa’, being appositional to dharmakāya ’, is a Bahuvrihi compound, in
which the former part avinirmuktajñāna' is relating to the latter part 'guņa’ as
an apposition. And hence, ‘avinirmuktajñāna ', being an adjective to 'guņa' (which
means 'buddhaguņāḥ' or 'tathāgatadharmāḥ' i. e. the Qualities of the Buddha), forms
again a kind of Bahuvrīhi compound. It should mean unreleased from jñāna '.
Here, ‘jñāna' signifies 'buddhajñāna', i. e. the Wisdom, by which the Buddha has
realized bodhi'. Therefore, this term avinirmuktajñāna' is an attribute, exclusive
to the Buddha's Qualities. (See S. p. 39, where a simile of lantern is used for clari.
fying this meaning and lantern is said to be of ‘avinirmukta-guņa’, omitting the
word “jñāna ').
In other passages, amuktajñāna amuktajña’ is used as an attribu-
te to 'guņa'. They are nothing but the abbreviated forms of " avinirmuktajñāna'
and
to have the same as the latter. See S. pp. 42,2–3; 55,14–15;
73,2–3; 76,9.
As for the term 'gangānadivālikā-vyatikrānta' it is also an adjective, exclusive to
the Buddha's Qualities and often used along with ' amuktajña ', * avinirbhāga' and ' acin-
tya’. (sometimes in the form of 'gangānadīvālukāvyativịtta’ (S. pp. 42,2; 55,14), “gan-
gānadivālikā-vyativetta ' (p. 12,12), “gangātīrarajo 'tita' (p. 80,9) or 'gangāsikatā 'tivítta'
(p. 85,16).
Instrumental case-ending of the word 'tathāgatadharma' (which is translated into
T. by 'dan ') shows the implied meaning of '-upeta ', ' -yoga ’,
-upeta ', ' -yoga', 'samanvāgama', or
otherwise is to be related to 'avinirbhāga’ as shown in the present translation. T. seems
to show the latter interpretation. C. offers no help.
24) AAN 467 a.
26) Chinese Tripițaka retains 3 kinds of translations of this sūtra, namely: 1)
et de translator unknown), Taisho, No. 302, 2) W
入如來德智不思議境界經 tr. by 圈那崛多(Jianagpta),
ibid., No. 303, 3) * tip * Po
Tetr. by Śikṣānanda,
ibid., No. 304. This passage is in Taisho, X, p. 915 b (No. 302).
26) uddeśamukha, T. bstan-paḥi sgo, C. not clear.
[ 145 ]



J. TAKASAKI
3.
The Essential Character of the 7 Subjects.
Of these [seven subjects),
Accompanied 27) by their own characteristics,
One should know respectively the [first] three subjects
From the introductory chapter in the Dhāraṇirāja-sútra 28),
And the [latter] four from [the chapter on) the distinction
Between the qualities of the Bodhisattva
and those of the Buddha 29). || 2 ||
[The meaning of this verse is as follows]: And of these seven Vaj-
rapadas, accompanied 30) by the explanation of their own characteristics,
the three subjects should be known as being from 31) the introductory
chapter (nidāna-parivarta) of the Holy Dhāraṇīśvararājasūtra, and then
the remaining four [are to be known] from the chapter on the distinction
between the qualities of the Bodhisattva and those of the Buddha
respectively 32). Therefore, it is said:
“The Lord has perfectly realized the equality of all things, has
set the wheel of Doctrine going well and has kindly trained num-
berless disciples " 33).
27) anugata, T. rjes-ḥbrel-ba (= anubandha), C. not clear.
Literally, 'anugata ’ is related to 'trīņi padāni', as well as to 'catvāri (padāni] '.
For 'svalakṣaṇenânugatāni', T. as if ásvalakṣaṇasyânngatāni’, and om. the case-
ending of 'eșām' (hdi-dag).
28) Dhāraņiśvararājasūtra. See below.
29) dhimat (= bodhisattva), and jina (= buddha). T. blo-ldan & rgyal-ba, respecti.
vely. For dharma ', c. (jñāna).
30) For ‘svalakṣaṇanirdesena anugatāni', T. ran-gi mtshan-ñid bstan-pa
dan / rjes-su ḥbrel-ba ni. (daň is probably for Instrumental case-ending).
31) The reading “ nidānaparivartânugatāni’ is rather obscure. It should be 'nidā.
naparivartād anugatāni'. So T. (ablative) Also v. 2 (nidānataḥ). But C. takes it as locative.
32) This sūtra is available in both Tibetan and Chinese Tripițakas. T. has the title
* Tathāgata-mahākaruņā-nirdeśa-sūtra ', which is identical with the title of Chinese
translation * (Taisho, No. 398). Beside this independent sūtra, C. has another
translation of the same sūtra as a part of the Mahāvaipulya-mahāsamnipāta-sūtra
方等大集經 (Taisho, No. 397). In this Mahāsamnipātasūtra, the Dhāraṇīrā-
jasūtra occupies the vols. 1-4, under the titles of Chap. I “ Alankāra-parivarta and
Chap. II Dhāraniśvararāja-bodhisattva-parivarta ”. It seems that the
“ Nidāna
parivarta” is equivalent to the Alankāra-parivarta, and the Bodhisattva-tathāgata-
dharmabheda-(parivarta)”, to the remaining part, i.e. Chap. II, denoting the contents
of this chapter.
38) DRS 10. (=*, Taisho, XIII, p. 409 a).
66
[ 146 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhāga
By these three fundamental sentences, respectively, one should know
the arrangement of the three Jewels [in the aspect of] their successive
origination and accomplishment 34). The remaining four subjects are to
be known as the statement of the accomplishment of the causes which
correspond to the origin of the three Jewels 35). Now, on the 8th Stage
of Bodhisattva, as the power of controlling all elements of phenomena
has been attained, so it is said:
“ He (= the Lord), sitting in the excellent Seat of the Englighten-
ment 36), realized perfectly the equality of all things ”.
On the 9th Stage of Bodhisattva, he is endowed with the power of
expressing the Highest Doctrine 37), knows very easily the intentions of
all living beings, brings all faculties [of living beings] 38) to the highest
perfection and becomes an expert in the removal of the chain of Defi-
ling forces 39) in all living beings. Therefore, it is said: “Having rea-
lized the perfect Enlightenment, he has well set the wheel of the Doc-
trine going ”. On the 10th Stage of Bodhisattva, after attaining the
anointment for the prince recognized as the next king in the highest
religious empire of the Buddha, he is immediately calmed in the Bud-
dha's effortless 40) acts uninterruptedly 41). Therefore, it is said: “He who
has well set the wheel of the Doctrine going has kindly trained number-
34) anupürva-samutpāda-samudāgama, T. rim-gyis skye-ba hgrub-pa, c. *
Æ e f gt. Here the word " samudāgama' (also in the next line) means siddhi'.
(T. hgrub-pa, C. lit. ).
35) triratnôtpatty-anurūpahetu-samudāgama-nirdeśa.
36) bodhi-manda. “maņda' has originally meant 'the scum of cooked rice, or the
essence of milk, i. e, cream'. In Pāli, it is used in the sense of ' essence ' (sāra) ' excellent
part'. T. translation sñin-po' shows the same meaning. Therefore 'bodhi-maņda'
means literally the essence of the Enlightenment ’, ´ the highest state of Enlightenment'.
But in later scriptures, it denotes the excellent place of the Enlightenment' as C. trans-
lation 'TARE TAL Prati z veled, and is often accompanied by the word
as in the text. Sometimes “bodhi-maņda ’ is explained as denoting Bodhi-tree.
Here I preferred C. translation.
37) dharmabhāņakatva, T. chos-smra-ba-ñid, C. & fiti (teacher of the Doctrine,
one who has the qualification for preaching the Doctrine).
38) indriya. There are 5 indriyas, namely sraddhā-i., virya-i., smộti-i., samādhi-i.,
& prajñā-i. viz. Mvyut 41.
39) vāsanā-anusamdhi, T. bag-chags-kyi mtshams-sbyor-ba, C. 習氣 (om. anu-
samdhi).
40) anābhoga, T. lhun-gyis grub, c. BA IV 15.
41) apratipraśrabdha, T. rgyun mi-ḥchad-pa(r), C. THU.
vara
[ 147 ]
11
.



J. TAKASAKI
less disciples". Furthermore, the same qualification of having trained
numberless disciples is shown in the same text, immediately after this
sentence. It runs as follows:
“ He was together with the assembly of a large number of monks 42),
and with the assembly of numberless Bodhisattvas
As he has well trained those who are in the enlightenment of the
Śrāvaka and up to that of the Buddha, step by step, it is said:
“ Thus being endowed with the virtuous qualities,
&c. 43)
22
And then, immediately after the passage of the] doctrine on the
nature of qualities of Śrāvakas and Bodhisattvas, in the reference to the
Buddha's inconceivable leadership 44) in regard to tranquillity, the esta-
blishment of the distinguishable qualities 45) of the Jewel of the Buddha
is to be known through the acc complishment of a great palace adorned
with circular ornament of jewels 46), through his bringing the people to-
gether 47) into the assembly of Tathāgatas, through the completion of
various kinds of worship with divine things 48), and through the pouring
of rain from the cloud of praises 49).
And next, through the splendid arrangement 50) of the seat of the
Doctrine and its brightness, and through the glorification 51) of the name
42) A - yāvat - B (beginning with A up to B), T. ... shes-bya-ba-nas shes-
bya-baķi bar, C. J5
43) DRS 1, a-b.
44) vșşabhitā (BHS), T. khyu-mchog (* the best bull’ rşabha). The term is often
used as an epithet of the Buddha. C. reads it as 'vişaya'.
45) For ‘guņavibhāga’, T. yon-tan rnam-par dbye-ba, C.
不思議事(aciniya-
vastu). In the following cases, however, C. I ono (guņaprabheda).
46) vipula-ratna-vyūha-mandala-vyūha-nivrtti. Of the two vyūhas' in the text,
the first one is translated into T. “bkod-pa’, C. j[E le decoration), and the second
one, into T. khyams (court-yard), c. * F (palace of jewel). C. r . seems to
include the meaning of 'maņdala ’. For 'vipula', C. as “vimala ', but T. as S.
47) samāvartana <samāvartayati (BHS), “gathers, collects' (viz. BHS Dic. s.v.).
For parişat-samāvartana, T. bkhor-ḥdus-pa (hdus-pa < ḥdu-ba, to come together). For
samāvartana, C. 雲集, but
seems to om. parişad.
•) C. om. dravya, and has 1 # * instead (vividha-divyā-pūjā?).
49) These passages are extracted from the same sūtra. (DRS 10-3 c).
vyuha, T. bkod-ba, C. # .
61) parikirtana, T. yons-su bsgrags-pa, c.TR TEL.
60)
[ 148 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
and qualities of the variety of doctrines 52), there should be known the
establishment of the distinguishable qualities of the Jewel of the Doctrine 53).
And next, in the light of the mutual 54) manifestation of the power of the
acting sphere 55) of various tranquillities of the Bodhisattvas, and in the
light of the description of their various forms of qualities, there should be
known the establishment of the distinguishable qualities of the Jewel of
the Community 56).
And again, immediately after this, in the reference to the Buddha's
presentation 57) of the highest fearlessness and confidence [in speech] 58)
on account of the prince of the supreme religious king (to the Bodhisattvas),
through the sprinkling of the Buddha's light. And, through the expla-
nation of the highest praise to the true virtues of the Tathāgata, through
the description 59) in the form of discussion 60) of the highest Doctrine of
the Great Vehicle, and, as the result of that knowledge, through the mani-
festation of the attainment of the highest sovereignty 61); through these
three, respectively, the highest establishment of the distinguishable qua-
lities of three Jewels is to be understood 62). And also therein the intro-
ductory chapter of this Sūtra is known to have come to the end 63).
Then, after the introductory chapter of this Sūtra, the Essence of
the Buddha is explained by a description of the sixtyfold appliance as
g
52) dharmaparyāya, T. chos-kyi rnam-grans, C. Æ MI.
53) Cf. DRS 3c-4 d.
54) anyonya, T. phan-tshun, C. &#. As J. suggested, “anyonya’ had better
be connected with bodhisattva' in a compound. C. seems to omit 'prabhā-samdar-
śana'.
56) gocara-vişaya, T. spyod-yul, c. TT .
56) DRS 4 0-5 b.
57) The reading “upakaraṇatā’ is to be corrected into “upaharaṇatā’, according
to C., which translates it twice by & Hil (to give, to offer), respectively, resolving the
compound into
anuttaradharmarāja-jyeșthaputra-upaharaņa’ and paramavaiśāradya-
upaharaṇa'. But this resolution of the compound is not good. Here the translation is
according to T, except the term 'upaharaṇa'. .... jyeșthiputra' meaning Bodhisattva.
58) pratibhāna (from Pāli pațibhāna, which has the special meaning of 'readiness
in speech' or 'confidence of speech', besides the usual sense of intelligence or manifesta-
tion of mind), T. spobs-pa (courage, confidence), c. 7 pkt (cowardless
talent of speech).
59) upanyasana (< upa-ni-V as) T. ne-bar bkod-pa, C. .
60) kathāvastu (subject of story), T. gtam-gyi dños-po, C. om.
61) C. om. aišvarya. For · sal-pratipatteħ ’, C. RA TE LETT
TE
(because of the practice of that Mahāyāna by rule).
62) Cf. DRS 5 5-6 c.
.) avasõnagata, T. mthaḥ-ħid (avasõnatva) c. et
( 149 )



J. TAKASAKI
the purifying factors of that Essence 64). Because the Essence of the
Buddha deserves to be applied the purification, in so far as it has qualities
of an object to be purified 65). And because of the effect of this meaning,
in the 10 Stages of Bodhisattva 66), there is illustrated again an analogy
of the purifying process of gold. In this Sūtra (the Dhāraṇirāja-sūtra)
too, after the description of the Acts of the Buddha, the allegory of unpu-
rified Vaiļūrya stone is illustrated. It runs as follows 67);
“ O noble youth, take for instance a skilful jewel-maker who knows
quite well how to purify precious stones. Having taken out an
unpurified precious stone from the mine 68), and having washed 69) it
with acid salt water 70), he then polishes it by rubbing ?1) with black-
a
64) şasty-ākāra-tad (=dhātu) -viśuddhi-guņa-parikarma-nirdesena.
About ‘viśuddhi-guņa-parikarman', see below.
65) visodhye 'rthe guņavati, tad -viśuddhi-parikarma-yogāt.
In comparison with 'viśuddhi-guna-parikarman' and 'buddhadhātoḥ șaștyākāra-
viếuddhi-parikarma-guņāḥ’in S. p.
6, 1: 11, the meaning seems as follows ' viśuddhi-guņa '
is“ visuddhi-parikarman' of 'dhātu'. In other words, ‘dhātu ’ is 'visodhya-guņavad,
artha', and hence, viếuddhi-parikarman ’ is inherent to “dhātu’ in the form of 'șustyā-
kāra-viśuddhiguna'. For 'parikarman', T. yons-su sbyon-ba (parisodhana, cleaning),
c. # (in the sense of method ', or appliance ') in the former two cases, and ,
in the third case
IH PR, for việuddhi-parikarma-guna). But in another case,
i.e. for 'parikamma' in the verse quoted in S. p. 6, C. translates it by, which
has the same sense as T. “yons-su sbyon-ba'. After all, the most suitable translation
for this term is ‘process of purification or ' appliance for purification”.
66) The significance of this daśașu bodhisattvabhūmişu' is not clear, C. says
instead 'in the Dasabhūmika-sūtra'. It sounds better in comparison with “asminneva
ca sūtre' in the next sentence. (Cf. Taisho, 10, 186 c, 188 c, etc.).
67) DRS p. 21 c.
68) maņigotra, T. nor-bu rin-po-cheủi rigs (= maņiratnagotra), C. (
["). Cf. Lank. p. 1,7 (ratnagotra-puspapratimandite ...samudra-malaya-śikhare).
69) utkṣālya in the text, but Ms. B reads ' unmilya'. There seems to be no definite
reason for changing "unmilya’ into utkşālya’ against Ms. reading. The meaning
of this word is no doubt 'washing , but in the special sense of metaling ’, i.e. 'taking
dust off in order to make jewel or metal manifest '(in causative sense). As this ' unmilya’
is found twice in Ms., it seems rather difficult to consider it as a mistake. At the same
time, however, we can not say ' unmilya ’ is absolutely correct, unless we find other exam-
ples of the same use.
70) tikşena khārôdakena, T. lan-Ishraþi chu rnon-pos, c. De tu (sharp ash?)
khāra' is a Prakrit form of Skt 'kşāra'.
paryavadāpanena paryavadāpayati (lit, makes perfectly clean by means of
purifying instrument '), T. yons-su sbyon-bas sbyon-ba byed-do. C. DIE
seems to show the actual process of purification. So I adopted it in the translation.
71)
[ 150 ]



The Ratnagotra vibhāga
hair cloth 72). But with this much work, he never ceases to make
efforts. After that, having washed the stone with meat juice 13)
of bitter taste, he polishes it by rubbing with a woollen blanket 74).
Even with this much work, he never ceases to make efforts. After
that, having washed it with great medical liquid 75), he polishes it
with closely-woven cotton cloth 78). After having been polished and
having been separated from all impure metals mingled with it 77),
it is called a precious 78) Vaiļūrya stone. Similarly, 0 noble youth,
the Tathāgata too, having known the unpurified element of living
beings 79), creates disgust in the mind of those living beings who
are attached to the world of transmigration through the teaching
of being afraid of the non-eternity, suffering, impersonality and
impurity [of this world] 80), and causes them to enter the discipline
of the sacred Doctrine. With this much of act the Buddha never
ceases to make efforts. After that, he makes them realize the
guiding manner 81) of the Tathāgata by the teaching of [the three-
fold gate to the emancipation 82), viz.] ‘non-substantiality' (sūn-
yatā), 'non-distinction'
(animitta) and
desirelessness' (apraņi-
hita). Even with this much of act, the Tathāgata never ceases to
make efforts. After that, through the teaching of the irreversible
wheel of the Doctrine 83) and through the teaching of the “puri-
fication of three circles ’84), he causes those living beings who have
6
72) krşņa-keśakambala, T. skraủi re-ba (om. krşņa), C. .
78) tīkșa āmişa-rasa, T. zańs-kyi klu-pa rnon-po, c. * ok k hit.
74) khandikā, T. lal-gyi la-ba, c,
## (a piece of wood covered with cloth).
75) mahā-vaișajya-rasa.
76) sūksma-vastra.
79) apagatakāca (Bahuvrihi comp.), T. dri-ma dan bral-ba(ni), C. U
M, WIE ES According to C., “kāca’ seems to be a general name for
dust or piece of metal and glass mingled within jewels.
78) abhijāta (* well born ’, ‘born in the noble family ’, “noble '), T. rigs-chen-po
(= mahākula), c. * (= mahā).
79) sattvadhātu, C. . T. as usual.
80) These are called “caturvidhâviparyāsa-samjñā’. viz. S. p. 30.
81) netri, T. tshul (=naya), but C. (dharmacakra). Cf. BHS Dic. 8. v.
82) (triņi vimokșa-mukhāni).
83) avivartya-dharmacakra.
84) trimandala-parisuddhi, T. ḥkhor-gsum yońs-su dag-pa, C.
不見三事(against
the usual translation,
E.
It means usually the purity of three things in do-
nation, i.e. the giver, the receiver, and the gift, and signifies ‘non-substantiality' (śūnyatā).
[ 151 ]



J. TAKASAKI
different kinds of characteristics and origins, to enter the sphere
of the Tathāgata. Having entered [the sphere of the Tathāgata),
those same beings, when they have realized the true nature of
the Tathāgata, are called unparalleled venerables ” 85).
Having in view this Essence of the Tathăgata, which is of pure ori-
gin 86), it is said as follows:
66
Just as gold, though it is invisible among stones and sands,
Comes to be seen by the process of purification,
Similarly, in this world of living beings
The Tathāgata [becomes visible by purification] ”.
Now, which are the sixtyfold factors of purifying process 87) of the
Essence of Buddhahood? They are, namely, (1) 4 kinds of ornament of
Bodhisattvas, (2) 8 kinds of illumination of Bodhisattvas, (3) 16 kinds
of Bodhisattva's great compassion, and (4) 32 kinds of Bodhisattva's
deeds 88).
85) dakşiņiya (worthy to receive 'daksiņā', i.e. gift, donation), T. yon-gnas (place
of gift), C. Th(punya-kşetra).
86) viſuddhigotra, T. yonis-su dag-paủi rigs, C. (as if 'prakſti-
parisuddhi ').
The source of this Prakrit verse is unknown. (It is apparently in Pāli, but is not
found among the present Pāli Tripitaka.)
87) See above (Note 65).
88) According to DRS, these guņas are as follows:
1) 4 • alankūras' ( W): 1. (sila), 2. Dok (samādhi),
3. (prajñā) & 4. BELE (dhārani). (DRS 5 6-8 b).
2) 8 · avabhāsas' ot 95]): 1. (smſti), 2. È (manas), 3. 15 (caryā ?),
4. (dharma), 5. jñāna), 6. T (sarya), 7. jjb it (abhijñā), & 8. THE TIME
(apratihatajñāna). (DRS 9 a-10 a).
3) 16 'karuņās”, by which each of the following 'mithyās’ of the living beings
is removed: 1. 91 (mithyā-drsti), 2. PU mill (caturvidha-viparyāsa), 3. #
BTL (ahaņkāra, mamakāra), 4. 11. (pañca-āvarana, i.e. rāga-ā., pratigha-ão,
styāna-middha-ā., auddhatya-kaukſiya-ā., & ricikitsã–ā.), 5. * 1 (sadāyatana-
abhiniveśa), 6. t (sapta-māna, i.e. māna, adhimāna, mānâtimāna, asmimāna,
abhimāna, ünamāna & mithyāmāna), 7. # (loka-mārga ?), 8. E durgati),
9. E *(daśa aku salāni karmaņi), 10. JE AJ OBRT (avidyā-mātsarya-väga ?),
11. ignorance about the 12 anga's of causality, 12. + *fB (16 kinds of " mi-
[ 152 ]



The Rat na gotravibhāga
Immediately after this statement, there is explained the Supreme
Enlightenment of the Buddha by indicating the 16 kinds of Great Com-
passion [imparted by] the Supreme Enlightenment 89). Next to this
description, there is explained the Buddha's Virtuous Qualities by the
indication of 10 Powers, 4 kinds of Intrepidity and 18 Exclusive Pro-
perties of the Buddha 90). And next, the Acts of the Buddha are explai-
ned by the indication of 32 kinds of Supreme Acts of the Buddha 91).
Thus, these 7 Vajrapadas should be understood in detail through the
indication of their own characters according to the Sūtra.
§ 4. The Inherent Connection between 7 Subjects.
And then, what is the inherent connection 92) between these subjects?
From the Buddha comes the Doctrine,
Owing to the Doctrine there is the Holy Community,
In the Community exists the Matrix, which is
thyādışți ”), 13. affliction to tribhava ', 14. Free (māra), 15.
(kāma ?), 16. igno-
rance about the gate to Nirvāṇa. (DRS 10 a-10 c).
4) 32 acts practised by Bodhisattvas, which are the counterpart of 32 bad
behaviours of living beings. (DRS 10 c-11 b).
89) The Supreme Enlightenment is said to be accompanied by the following 16 quali-
ties, namely: 1. (suddhi-śānti), 2. P (prakſtiparisuddhi),
3. Tu, To (anudgraha, anupekşā ?), 4. SE U JE ** (asamjñā, anārambana),
5. EHF (tryadhva-samatā), 6. THE THE Teeny (asamskệta), 7. SIE SJ
my #nirvikalpa-padârtha), 8. Tin (anabhilāpya), 9. HE HX THE ** FILE
) (apratisthita), 10. (sünya), 11. (ākāśavat), 12. I Tf (satya-
pada), 13.
##bl FE #U JE 11E) (animitta-akſtrima ?), 14. FE FILE
HY SHE ATE) (anāsrava, etc.), 15. * PAJ SE (sānti, prabhā, araņa?),
16. (?) (DRS 11 b-14 a) (Chinese terms in brackets are taken from ta
Taisho, 8, pp. 422 a-425 a).
Here the reason why these qualities are called 'mahākaruņā’ is that they are inse-
parable from mahākaruņā' and Buddha's Enlightenment realizes itself in the form
of the acts of " mahākaruņā”. Cf. DRS 11 b, " FUE EL RX, kn
Tij Hit S SI". (The Supreme Enlightenment and the Great Compassion,
these two are equal and undistinguishable from each other).
90) See Chap. IV (III).; DRS 14 c-21 c (there is no description of the 32 Mahāpuru-
şalakṣaṇa in DRS).
91) DRS 26 6-27 b. Each of the 32 karman's is indistinct.
92) anuśleșa (
anu-V ślis), T. ḥbrel-pa (= sambandha), c. * (anu-krama).
The use of 'anuśleșa ' seems to be quite rare. BHS Dic, records only the form of ' anu-
6
[ 153 ]



J. TAKASAKI
The element of Wisdom, aiming at its acquisition 93);
Its acquisition of the Wisdom is the Supreme Enlightenment,
Which is endowed with the Qualities, 10 Powers and others,
And accompanied by altruistic Acts for all living beings. // 3 //
Finished [the explanation of] the relation between each subject in
the text 94).
ślişta' (ppp.) found in Mahāvastu, iii-71-14. viz. BHS Dic., s. v. C. takes it merely
to show the order of succession between each subject and uses, in each case, the ablative
for the preceding one. But it is not agreeable. Therefore, the reading " sanghe' in the
text, though against T. & C, is quite correct.
93) “jñāna-dhātu-āptiniştha '. For “niştha’, T. mthar. (* āpti-niștha' seems to
mean 'having (jñāna-)āpti as the end'. In comparison with it, “jñāna-dhātu' seems to
mean "garbha', which is indicated by 'tad' in the next line. C. reads as 'sanghād
apratihatadhātuḥ (FE. THE PE), dhātor jñānam' and om. 'jñānadhātvāptiniştha ' &
agrabodhi'. (Supreme Enlightenment)
94) śāstrasambandha. For sambandha, T. Ảbrel-pa, C. 法義體相
(dharmartha-
svalakṣaṇa ?).
[ 154 )



II. THE JEWEL OF THE BUDDHA
Hereafter we should explain the meaning of Slokas (basic verses) 1).
Those living beings who were lead by the Tathāgata, while taking
their refuge in the Tathāgata, also take refuge in the Doctrine and
Community through the faith as the natural outflow of the Reality 2).
Therefore, first of all, there is one śloka with regard to the Jewel of The
Buddha.
(Kārikā 1)
I bow to the one, who has realized 3) the Buddhahood 4)
Which has neither beginning, middle nor end, and is quiescent,
And who, having realized himself, taught the Path,
Fearless and eternal, in order to enlighten the ignorant 5),
And who, having in hand the excellent sword and thunderbolt
Of Wisdom and Mercy, cuts in pieces 6) all sprouts of Sufferings,
And breaks the wall of doubts 7) concealed
In the forest of various views 8). || 4 ||
1) The word śloka has a strict use in this text, especially in Chap. I. It is used mostly
in case of certain verses which I picked up as the basic verses. In I. Introduction, it is
clear, there is no śloka, though we have 3 ‘verses '. Śloka-or Kārikā- text starts with
the following verse (v. 4). Hereafter I shall use the Sanskrit word śloka without translation
when it indicates the basic verses. About a detailed discussion on the basic verses, see
my Introduction.
2) dharmatānişyandabhiprasādena, T. chos-ñid-kyi rgyu-mthun-paại dvan-ba, C. The
tik kn (respecting the Tathāgata). For abhi prasāda, Páli, abhippasāda, T. dvan-ba,
dvans-pa (purity, faith, trust). Cf. ŚMS 221 a, where emphasis lies on the “eka śaraṇatā”
of the Buddha. See also V. The three jewels as refuges.
3) vibuddha, 'one who has enlightened ’.
4) buddhatva, T. sans-rgyas-ñid, C. T I.
5) abudha (BHS), - Skt. abuddha.
6) ekacchid, both T. & C. omit eka.
7) vimati, T. the-tshom (doubt), C. UAB (viparyasta-mati, wrong view).
8) C. reads this passage as follows and breaks the wrong view and all forests
defilements]
(
FMO) concealed in the mountain of various views ”
[of d
.
[ 155 ]



J. TAKASAKI
§ 1. The Eightfold Quality of the Buddhahood.
What is shown by this [śloka]?
Being immutable, free from efforts
And not being dependent upon the others,
[Also] Being endowed with Wisdom, Compassion and [superna-
tural] Power [imparted by both],
The Buddhahood has two kinds of benefit. || 5 ||
By this verse there has been briefly explained the Buddhahood as
being contracted by eight qualities. Which are the 8 qualities? Namely,
1) Immutability (asaskſtatva), 2) being free from any effort (anābhogatā),
3) Enlightenment, not dependent on others (aparapratyayâbhisambodhi) ),
4) Wisdom (jñāna), 5) Compassion (karuņā) 10), 6) (supernatural] power
(sakti), 7) fulfilment of self-benefit (svârthasampad), and 8) fulfilment of
benefit for others (parârthasampad) 11).
As having neither beginning, middle nor end by nature,
It is immutable;
Being the body of quiet character,
It is free from
any
effort, thus remembered by tradition || 6 ||
Being realized by oneself 12).
It is cognizable without any help of others;
Thus awakened in a threefold way, it is Wisdom,
Because of preaching the way, it is Compassion. // 7 //
It is Power because of destroying
Suffering and Defilements by Wisdom and Compassion;
By the first three qualities, benefit for oneself,
And by the latter three, benefit for others [is indicated]. || 8 ||
1) asamskſta: The word “immutable’ (asamskſta) should be under-
stood as being opposite to being conditioned or caused (samskſta) 13). Here
9) aparapratyayôdita in the verse.
10) kāruņya in the verse.
11) Translations of these 8 qualities in T. & C. are as follows:
1) ḥdus ma-byas-pa-ſid, FHE; 2) lhun-gyis-grub-pa, ; 3) gshan-
gyi rkyen-gyis mñon-par rtogs-pa ma yin-pa,
THE HO SENI; 4) ye-ses, ; 5) thugs-
rje, ; 6) nus-pa, tJ; 7) ran-gi don phun-sum tshogs-pa, FURN; 8) gshan-gyi
don phun-sum tshogs-pa, ful Ful .
12) pratyātmam adhigamya, C. J
13) samskſta, T. ḥdus-byas-pa, c. io.
[ 156 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
'being conditioned' (samskſta) means the thing, of which origination, last-
ing, as well as destruction 14) are conceivable. Because of the absence of
these characteristics, the Buddhahood should be seen as having neither
beginning, middle nor end, and being represented as the immutable Ab-
solute Body.
2) anābhoga: It is free from efforts because all dualistic views 15)
and false discriminations 16) have ceased to exist.
3) aparapratyayâbhisambodhi: It is enlightened without any help
of others’ (aparapratyayôdaya) because it is realized through one's innate
knowledge. Here the word “udaya' means “perfect enlightenment'
(abhisambodha), in which the sense origination’ is implied 17). Thus,
as being Tathāgata, though it is immutable and of the characteristic of
non-activity, the whole action of the Perfectly Enlightened One proceeds
without any effort, ceaselessly and uninterruptedly as far as the world
exists 18).
4) Jñāna, 5) karunā, & 6) sakti: Thus, not having heard the Bud-
dhahood, which is a quite marvellous and unthinkable sphere, from some-
body else, but having perfectly cognized its unutterable nature by one-
self' (svayam), i.e. by means of self-born knowledge which needs no tea-
14) utpāda, T. skye-ba, C. &; sthiti, T. gnas-pa, c. t; and bhanga, T. hjig-pa,
c. ii, respectively. Sometimes, inserting anyathātva (C. 4) between sthiti and bhanga,
we count 4 characteristics of samskſta. Cf. Abhidharmakośa. II. 45 and comm. Here,
these 3 are implied the beginning, middle and end, as in the śloka.
15) prapa ñca (Pāli papañca), T. spros-pa, C. . T. shows merely a literal tran-
slation of the term prapanca (pra-V pac or - V pañc, to spread out, to enlarge). But,
in Buddhist thought, this term signifies' pluralistic view '. i.e. a view, by which the one
entity is regarded as plural, manifold (= prapañca-vacana) and not “the phenomenal
world ’ as in the Vedānta philosophy. C. means literally “frivolous talk ’, which shows
almost the exact sense of this Buddhist term. That is to say, from the Buddhist point
of view, any pluralistic view is considered as a false view. In the Buddhist texts, the term
is usually accompanied by vikalpa.
16) vikalpa, T. rnam-par rtog-pa,
C. 5 (sometimes only 5 l).
17) T. reading
odaya ni ḥdir mñon-par-rtogs-pa-la ḥdod-kyi, skye-ba-la ni ma
yin-no” means here the word “ udaya’ is to be understood in the sense of ' abhisam-
bodha' and not in the sense of ' utpada as 0 translated. Though it is not a literal
translation of Skt, it catches the significance quite well. “Kyi' of 'ḥdod-kyi’ in the above
sentence is a conjunction of two clauses, showing an opposite sense between them.
(udaya, utpāda tathāgatôtpatti, by which is meant originally the acquisition of
Enlightenment by śākyamuni. Cf. Pāli AN. I, 13. Ekapuggala-vaggo.)
18) á samsārakoteh, c. Fue ha t * (from the beginningless past). Cf. S. p. 32,
1. 4 (ā samsārāt), p. 79, 1. 17 (ā bhavagateh), p. 88, 1. 4 and p. 113, 1. 4 (ā bhavasthiteḥ),
p. 112, 1. 9 (ā bhavâgrataḥ).
[ 157 ]



J. TAKASAKI
cher 19), and, with respect to his comprehension, in order to enlighten
the others too, who are ignorant 20) and blind by birth, [the Buddha]
has preached 21) the path to follow 22) that [Buddhahood). Therefore,
[the Buddha) should be understood as being endowed with the supreme
Wisdom and Compassion. The fearlessness (abhayatva) of Path is due
to its transcendency. The transcendency is due to its never again being
turned back. With respect to their abolition of the roots of others'
Suffering (duḥkha) and Defilement (klesa), the power (sakti) of Wisdom
and of Compassion of the Tathāgata, is explained by means of the
examples of sword and thunderbolt, respectively. Of these, the root of
Suffering is, in short, one kind of origination of Individuality 23) (nāma-
rūpa) on the [three] existences 24). The root of Defilement is anything
which is based on the prejudice 25) to the individual existence 26), i.e.
wrong view and doubt 27).
Here, the Suffering, as being contracted in
the Individuality, should be regarded as having the state of sprout because
of its character of origination. As having the character of cutting it,
it should be known that the Buddha's power of both Wisdom and Com-
passion is illustrated by an example of sword. The Defilement, which
is contracted in wrong view and doubt and is to be destroyed by the Path
of true perception, is difficult to be understood and hardly to be over-
come by means of mundane knowledge. Thence, it is akin to the wall
concealed by a thick forest. As having the character of breaking, it
should be known that Buddha's Power of both Wisdom and Compassion
is illustrated by an example of thunderbolt.
19)
anācāryaka (Pāli anācaryaka), T. slob-dpon med-pa, C.
不從師聞: CE. Pali
MN vol. 1, p. 171 (Āryapariyesana-sutta).
20) abudha S. abuddha.
21) vyupadeśa (BHS) (perhaps a wrong form for Skt. vyapadeśa), T. ston-pa, C. *.
22) anugāmin, T. rjes-su rtogs-pa (= anubodha), C. reads instead • anuttara.
23) nāmarūpa, T. min dan gzugs, c. B. mental elements and material elements,
by which the individuality is distinguished from each other ’, nāma' means the 4
skandhas other than rūpa’, therefore, nāmarūpa is a synonym of pañcaskandhāḥ.
24) bhavāḥ T. srid-rnams-pa, C.
Et
(tribhava).
25) abhiniveśa (Pāli abhinivesa), false opinion, superstition, T. mron-par śen-pa,
C. .
20) satkāya (P. sakkāya), T. hjig-tshogs (a collection perishable), c. , physical
body.
27) There are 4 kinds of “kleśas ’ which are caused by the
wrong
discrimination
and are to perish by darśana-mārga. They are mithyādsști, dịști-parāmarśa, silavra-
taparāmarśa and vicikitsā. satkāyadęsti is, on the contrary, an innate defilement, and
is to perish by bhāvanā-märga.
[ 158 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhāga
§ 2. Reference to the Jñānâlokālaňkāra-sūtra.
Thus, the six qualities of the Tathāgata mentioned above should be
understood by this very order 28) and with detailed and analytical expla-
nation, according to the Sarvabuddhavişayâvatārajñānâlokālamkāra-sūtra 29).
In that Sūtra, it is said as follows:
“O Manjuśrī, he who is of no origination or destruction is
(i.e. has the epithets) the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfectly En-
lightenend One ” 30).
By this, first of all, it is explained that the Tathāgata is of immu-
table character. And immediately after this, by nine illustrations beginn-
ing with the illustration of a reflection of the Indra on the surface of an
immaculate Vaidūrya stone 31), with reference to this very meaning of
the Tathāgata's being neither originated nor destructed, it is said as
follows 32):
“Thus, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfectly Enlighte-
ned One neither moves nor produces any thought 33), neither ex-
plains in a dualistic way nor imagines falsely nor discriminates.
He is unimaginable, indiscriminative, devoid of thinking 35) and
34)
28) ānupūrvi (anupūrvi?), Pāli, anupubbi. T. go-rims. Cf. S. p. 31, 1. 7: hetv-
ānupurvyā (Ms. B anu-). See BHS Dic. s.v.
29) We have 3 translations of this sūtra in the Chinese Tripițaka :
1) ku k dit of 1 - to ptr. by
De vit (Dharmaruci), (501 A. D.), Taisho, No. 357 (12, p. 239-250 a); 2) — UJJ
諸佛境界智莊嚴經 tr. by 1 Vet (Samghabhadra)& c. (511-520
A. D.), Taisho No. 358 (12, p. 250 a-253 e); 3) R * 1#
HJ JE se je tr. by £& c. (the 11th cent. A. D.), Taisho, No. 359
(12, p. 253 c-265 b). Of them, the simplest edition is 2), which seems to show the original
type of this sūtra. However, the 9 illustrations on the Buddha's Acts utilized in the
Ratna. are partly lacking in 2), hence hereafter the equivalency in C. will be shown
according to 1) (abbr. JAĀ).
30) C. JAĀ, 240 b.
31) About the 9 illustrations, see Chap. IV (S. p. 99 ff.).
32) JAĀ, 240 c.
33) The term “vithapati’ is to be corrected into vithapeti’, as a hybrid form
of viſhapayati, Caus. of Skt. viysthā. so, T. sems-par byed-pa, c.TX [U]. Cf. S. p. 49,
1. 1. vithapyante, 1. 2. vithapitā, vithapanā.
34) prapañcayati. See Note II–15.
35) T. bsam-du med-pa (= acintya), c. The Tacintya
should be inserted after 'acitta'.
6
[ 159 ]



J. TAKASAKI
minding, of quiescent character, of neither origination nor destruc-
tion. He cannot be seen, or heard, or smelt, or tested, or touched
and has no characteristic remark, has neither making known nor
being made known.” and so forth.
Such is the explanation of various kinds of aspects of quiescence 36).
By this it is indicated that, in his own acts, all dualistic views and false
discriminations have ceased to exist; hence, the Tathāgata is free from
efforts.
After this, i.e. after the explanation of [nine) illustrations, there is
explained by the remaining texts the Tathāgata's perfect enlightenment
realized without any help of others with respect to all the gates to the
Perfect Enlightenment of the real nature of all elements 37).
And after this, with reference to the Tathāgata's 16 kinds of En-
ightenment 38), it is said as follows 39) :
There, 0 Mañjusri, as soon as the Tathāgata has enlightened
all the elements of such a nature and has observed the essential
nature of all living beings as 'impure ' ' not removing stains' and
blemished ’, the Creat Compassion named “ mastery'sets in forth
on all living beings ".
By this the Tathāgata's possession of Supreme Wisdom and Com-
passion is demonstrated. There, 66 all the elements of such a nature
means “ [all the elements, having the nature] as has been said before !,
i.e. the character of non-existence 40). Having enlightened'
having known truly by means of Buddha's non-discriminative Wisdom '.
“Of [all] living beings means 'of those [living beings] who are in the
means
36) upaśamaprabheda-pradeśa, T. ñe-bar shi-baħi tshig-gi rab-tu dbye-ba (=upa-
sama śabda-prabheda ?), c. S Ź t(= upaśama-prabheda-laksana).
Here ‘pradeśa’ seems to mean ' aspect' (vişaya or gocara).
37) C. regards . sarvatathatâbhisambodhamukheşu' as a quotation, which is equi-
valent to JAĀ, 247 b.
38) Cf. Note 1-89.
39) JAA, 247 b. (ko * - tJJ UTJE
Up # # W TEHL. ...observing the nature
of all living beings, sets forth the Compassion which is ‘pure', 'immaculate', 'not
blemished' and 'mastery '), The former 3 epithets are translated in an opposite way,
but it is probably a wrong translation.
40) abhāva-svabhāvāt' in the text should be corrected abhāvasvabhāvān',
by accepting T. reading 'dros-po med-paḥi no-bo-ñid-du (Acc.)-ḥo' as an apposition
to nirdiştān'.
[ 160 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
29
state of conformed [in right way] (niyata-), unconformed (aniyata-) and
wrongly conformed (mithyā-niyata-) groups (rāśi) ' “ Essential nature
(dharmadhātu)” 41) means the Matrix of the Tathāgata, which is not
different from his own quality by nature ’ 42). Having observed ”
means “ having perceived all kinds (i.e. impure, etc.) through the Buddha's
eye to which nothing is obscure ? 43). “Impure (aśuddha)” means '[impure
nature] of the ignorant and common people ? because of obstruction caused
by Moral Defilement (klésâvaraņa). Not removing
moving stains (avimala) ’
means ' [stainful nature] of the Sravākas and Pratyekabuddhas' because
of obstruction on account of knowable things (jñeyâvaraņa).
66 Blemished
(sângana) ” 44) means “[blemished nature) of Bodhisattvas', because of
[their] retaining [the impression of] one of both [obstructions] 45). [The
Compassion is named] mastery (vikrīditā) 99 46) because it enters well into
the gates of accomplished means of training in various ways (vividhā) 47).
“ The great Compassion sets forth on all living beings”, because [the
Buddha], having realized 48) the characteristics of all living beings through
to
41) T. chos-kyi dbyins, C.
法性 in the
quotation (instead of the usual •£*).
But here C. has, along with E, ŽE dharmată, dharmasva-
bhāva ?).
42) (sattvānām) dharmadhātu svadharmatā-prakstinirviśişta-tathāgatagarbha.
48) C. explains the words from sarvasattvānām avalokya' together.
44) T. skyon-dan bcas-pa, c. cf. BHS. Dic. angana, sāngana, s.v.
46) Instead of 'tadubhayâniyatama-vićiştayā’ in the text, the reading should be
tadubhayânyatamâva śişțatayā”. For "avasistată” (remained), T. Ihag-ma, and C.
shows nearly the same meaning.
46) T. rnam-par-brtse-ba, instead of the usual rnam-par rol-pa, (brtse-ba sneha
[affection], hence the whole means 'taking compassion in various ways '?). On the
contrary C. translates it by eith', which is usually equivalent to “vijțmbhita’ (mani-
festation of the Buddha's power). The term vikrīdita is often used in the sense of 'having
perfect mastery' in BHS as E. mentioned (e. g. trivimokşamukha-vikrīdito, Lalitavistara).
Here, being an epithet or an apposition to “karuņā’, the feminine form is used.
47) The reading of this passage is rather obvious. There is no exact concordance
between S., T. & C. The prefix 'vi-' is interpreted by “vividhā', in common with
S., T. & C., but T. connects this “vividhā' to “mukha' and C. uses this word twice, once
connecting to “upāya’ and in the second case, to “mukha'. On the contrary, S. connects
it to ' supravişta’. For ‘vinayôpāya', both T. & C. read as vineyðpāya’. But there
seems to be not so much difference between both terms as to their sense. Cf. S. v. IV-1
' vineyadhātau vinayâbhyupāye’. C. translation of this passage runs as follows:
“ It is ' vikriditā’ because (the Buddha], having known (= sampanna ?) the various
means by which living beings are to be converted, enters the various gates of that
means”.
48) The reading . abhisambuddhabodheḥ' in the text is doubtful. T. mnor-par rdsogs-
[ 161 ]



J. TAKASAKI
equality 49), has the intention to lead [the living beings] to the acquisi-
tion of their own nature 50). After this, i.e. having aroused the supreme
Wisdom and Compassion, [the Buddha] has no relaxation of activity
for effectuating the setting in motion of the Wheel of unparalleled Doctrine.
This [activity) should be known as power' of both [Wisdom and Com-
passion in regard of acting for the sake of others.
7) Svârthasampad & 8) parârthasampad: Here, of these six qualities
of the Tathāgata, according to order [the quality] connected with the
first three qualities, immutable, etc. is 'the fulfilment of self-benefit'
(svârthasampad), and [the quality connected with] the remaining three,
Wisdom, etc. is the fulfilment of benefit for others' (parârthasampad).
Besides [there is another meaning]. By the word Wisdom ’, the ful-
filment of self-benefit is designated, in so far as the highest, eternal and
quiescent place 51) has the character of being the basis of his own perfect
enlightenment. By the words Compassionand “ Power', the fulfilment
of benefit for others is designated, because of their character of being the
basis for setting forth the Wheel of the highest and greatest Doctrine.
6
par byan-chub-pas na (abhisambodheḥ), C. seems to have a double expression
th, but it is not certain whether it is the translation of this term or that of
* adhigamaprāpaņa’ (leads to the acquisition), because there is another expression til
#le, after 'wahākaruņā iti', and we seems to be connected with
• KĄ ...' (in order to, or having intention to) as an apposition to · ko
' (to enlighten the same as the Buddha, i.e. to enlighten the Highest Enlightne-
ment). If so, 證大菩提, is merely an interpreting word by the Chinese translator.
And even if we accept the double expression, still it is better to be abhisambodhi-
buddhya'.
49) samatayā, id., the equality, or the lack of difference (nirvisistatā) between the
Buddha himself and all sattvas. See, Note II–42, VII - I. Cf. The Tathāgatagar-
bhasūtra, the Tathāgatôpattisambhavanirdeśa (Avat S).
50) C. reads the whole passage as follows:
mahākaruņā’ [signifies] that, having attained the Great Enlightenment,
[the Buddha] obtains the Great Compassion equally for all living beings with intention
to make living beings realize what the Buddha did, i.e. to make them enlighten the
Great Enlightenment. Therefore, [it is called mahākaruņā '].” It seems C. takes
* svadharmatā' as “ Buddha's own nature', i.e. the Enlightenment.
61) paramanityộpaśāntipada, c. - P. Usually, upaśāntipada
signifies ' nirvāṇa'.
G
[ 162 ]



III. THE JEWEL OF THE DOCTRINE
Now, from the Jewel of the Buddha, there arises the Jewel of the
Doctrine. Therefore, immediately after [the explanation of] the former,
we have one śloka concerning the latter.
(Kārikā 2).
I bow before the sun of the Doctrine,
Which is neither non-being nor being,
Nor both being and non-being together,
And neither different from being nor from non-being 1);
Which cannot be speculated upon and is beyond explanation,
But revealed [only] by introspection 2) and is quiescent;
And which, with rays of light of the immaculate Wisdom,
Destroys passion, hatred 3) and darkness 4)
with respect to all the basis of cognition 5). || 9 ||
2)
1) This alternative proposition is called 'catuskoţikā'. Cf. Madhyamaka-kārikā
I, 7, Mahāyānasūtrâlankāra VI, 1, Lankāvatāra p. 122, 1. 4-8, etc.
pratyātmavedya (= pratyātmavedanīya in comm.), T. so-so-ran-gyis rig (-par-
bya-ba), C. J U H, E.
3) doșa (BHS for Skt. dveșa, Pāli dosa), T. sdan(-ba) (shq-sdan).
4) timira, T., rab-rib. It means doctrinally the ignorance, moha or avidyā. So
C. YEE (moha). But, in comparison with the simile of the sun, what is to be destroyed is
timira (the sun is often referred to by such terms as timiracchid, timiranāśana, timiranud,
timiraripu, timirâri, etc., cf. M. W. Skt. Dictionary, s.v.) and C. B
seems to show
this sense.
5) ārambaņa (āramvana in the text is probably a misprint) (BHS fr. Pāli āram-
Skt. ālambana), T. dmigs-pa, C.
c.
Morbic
PR? C. translation is
curious.
means usually 'vitarka-vicāra’ and I could not trace the use of
for ‘ārambana’ in other texts. But, viz. Note VI-70 (for cittârambana, C. "L
Ali
and XVII-187 (for
nirālamba ', c. SE 1). The present transla-
тапа
6
[ 163 ]
12



J. TAKASAKI
§ 1. Eightfold Quality of the Doctrine B).
What is shown by this śloka?
Because of its being unthinkable, non-dual,
and being non-discriminative,
And because of its pureness, manifestation and hostility;
The Doctrine, which is Deliverance and also
by which arises Deliverance
Has the characteristics of the two Truths. || 10 ||
By this verse, in brief, the Jewel of the Doctrine is explained as being
contracted by eight qualities. Which are the eight qualities? They are
1) unthinkability (acintyatva), 2) non-duality (advayatā), 3) non-discri-
minativeness (nirvikalpatā), 4) purity (suddhi), 5) [being] manifest
(abhivyaktikaraņa), 6) hostility [against obstacles] (pratipakşatā), 7)
Deliverance [from passions] (virāga), and 8) cause of Deliverance
(virāgahetu)?).
tion is according to T. The C. translation for the whole line runs as follows:
* Destroys several kinds of darkness (he), i.e. researching and investiga-
tion) [by discriminative mind), passions, hatred and ignorance, and all [other)
defilements ".
In the light of the commentary, I seems to be equivalent to vibandha ',
and
to vikalpa or ayoniśomanasikāra, and C. translation is more understan-
dable than S.
About the use of the term “ārambana', see below (Note III-39). Cf. BHS Dic.
8. v. (ārambana & ālambana).
6) Cf. Buddhagotraśāstra (BGś) 801 b ff. (under Chap. IV, [V] vrtti, where these
8 categories are explained as the qualities of the Buddha's 'āśrayaparivítti ').
7) Terms in v. 10 and translations of these 8 in T. & C., as well as in BGś are as
follows:
1) acintya, bsam-du med-pa-ñid, Ti DJ (BGś To PJ );
2) advaya, gñis-su med-pa-ſid, T = (BGŚ THIE ); 3) nişkalpa, rnam-par rtog-
pa med-pa-ñid, HE ); 4) suddhi, dag-pa, #, (BGś ); 5) vyakti, mnon-
par gsal-bar (byed-pa), EU, UEL (BGŚ I l); 6) vipakşa gñen-poủi phyogs-
ñid, TY, ; 7) yo virāgaḥ, ḥdod chags dan bral-ba, (BGS ), &
8) yena virāgaḥ, hdod-chags dan bral-baħi rgyu, ent (BGS TE ]). Cf.
BGS 801 b.
[ 164 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
§ 2. Nirodha-satya and Mārga-satya.
Deliverance 8) is summarized
In both truths, Extinction and Path,
Which 9) are each to be known
By three qualities according to order. || 11 ||
Of these six qualities, by the first three qualities, i.e. unthinkabi-
lity, non-duality and non-discriminativeness, the Truth of Extinction is
explained. From this [explanation] it should be known that the Deli-
verance [itself] is contracted. And by the remaining three qualities,
i.e. purity, manifestation and hostility, the Truth of Path is explained,
and from this, it should be known that the cause of Deliverance is con-
tracted. That which is Deliverance means [the Doctrine, as] the
Truth of Extinction, and “ by which arises the Deliverance” means “by
[the Doctrine as) the Truth of Path. ' Having joined these two together 10),
it is explained, 'being of the nature of Deliverance (virāgadharma) 11)
means “having characteristic of the two purifying Truths 12).
§ 3. The Doctrine as the Truth of Extinction.
Because of its being beyond speculation and explanation,
And because of its being the knowledge of Saints 13),
Unthinkability [of the Doctrine should be known];
8)
virāgitā', the state of being virāgin (one who is passionless). T. ^ [hdod-]chags
[dan] bral[-bal-ñid' seems equivalent to visāgatā”. C. E' also shows nothing special.
The meaning of this word is shown below by the term “virāgadharma’, which is the
common nature of both ' nirodhasatya ' & ' mārgasatya’. Hence' virāgatā 'seems here a
more natural form than ‘virāgitā ’.
9) The reading “ ete ’in the text should be understood in the sense' yābhyām nirodha-
mārgasatyābhyām te (ete) veditavye’. C. translates nirodha-mārga-satyābhyām ' as
the subject, and takes 'sa mgrhīta’ as active voice. Consequently there is no difficulty
in C. reading.
10) abhisamasya (gr. of abhi-sam-Vas), T. mnon-par bsdus te, C. A ....
11) C. E E. This is an interpretation of the word 'virāgitā' (or virāgatā) in v. 11.
See above.
12) vyavadāna-satyadvaya-lakṣaṇa, T. rnam-par byan-bahi bden-pa gñis-kyi mtshan-
ñid, c.
= vyavadānasatyadvaya ' means 'the 2 satyas concerned with
purification' i.e. nirodhasatya and mārgasatya, and is opposite to 'duḥkhasatya' and
• samudayasatya', which are, in their turn, to be termed 'samkleśasatyadvaya '.
13) ārya, T. hphags-pa, C. .
[ 165 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Because of quiescence it is non-dual and non-discriminative,
And three [qualities], purity etc., are akin to the sun. || 12 ||
1) acintyatva: Unthinkability of the Truth of Extinction, in short,
should be known by three causes. By which three? Because, 1) it is not
a sphere of speculation even by four categories [of existence] 14), i.e non-
being, being, being and non-being together, and neither being nor non-being;
2) it cannot be explained by any sound, voice, speech, way of speech,
explanation, agreed term, designation, conversation [and so forth) 15);
and 3) it is to be revealed by the introspection of Saints.
2) advayatā & 3) nirvikalpatā. How should here be understood non-
duality and non-discriminativeness of the Truth of Extinction? It is
taught by the Lord as follows 16):
“O Sāriputra, quiescent 17) is this Absolute Body (of the Buddha),
having the nature 18) of being non-dual and non-discriminative ".
19)
or
Here, “dual' (dvaya)
means action'
· active force' (karman), [as
by deed, word and thought] '20) and Defilement (klesa); discrimination
(vikalpa) means 'Irrational Thought (ayoniśomanasikāra) '21) which is the
cause of origination of Action and Defilements. By knowing deeply that
;
T
14) So-called “catuṣkotikā'. See above.
16) ruta, T. sgra (= sabda), C
.; ravita (artificial sound), T. skad (= bhāṣā), c.
(echo?); ghoşa, T. brjod-pa (= vacana), c. ; väkpatha, T. nag-gi yul, c. *; nirukti,
T. ne-tshig, C
.; samketa, T. brda, C. ; vyavahāra, T. tha-sñad, c. 9 W;
abhilāpa, T. mron-par brjod-pa, c. , respectively. Equivalency to each term
in C. is not sure. About the etymology of vyavahāra', see Note VIII-(IX) A-61.
16) AAN 467 b, (BGŚ also quotes this sentence).
17) śiva, C. m. But T. hgog-pa (= nirodha), perhaps in the sense that “ siva'
is an epithet of nirodha'.
18) dharman (ifc). In another passage, the same sentence is quoted changing 'dhar-
mā’into ' dharmatayā'. (S. p. 44, 1. 14). It seems to be the original reading and is prefe-
rable here.
19) C. Jos in
(what are two, of which is taught . non-
dual '?).
20) See below (S. p. 13, 1. 7 ff.). Cf. PTS Dic (* kamma'). Whenever karman'
and “kleśa' are mentioned side by side, the former signifies the actual deed by body,
word and thought, of which the cause is ‘kleśa'. But in the relation to “janman', i.e.
the next birth, 'karman’ is the cause of 'janman' (or bhava). In this sense “karman'
should be regarded as the 'active force', some kind of energy and has a sense similar
to 'samskāra.
21) T. ishul-bshin ma-yin-pa yid-la byed-pa, c. $BETE ME). As
for its being a cause of Defilements and Actions, see S. p. 13 and p. 42, 1. 10 ff.
[ 166 ]



The R at nag otra vibhāg a
this Irrational thought is extinct by nature, consequently, there is no ori-
gination of duality and discrimination; for this reason there is absolutely
no origination of Suffering. This is called the Truth of Extinction of
Suffering. It should never be explained that, because of extinction of
something, it is [called] the Truth of Extinction of Suffering. It is said
as follows 22):
“O Mañjuśrī, in case there is neither origination nor extinction,
mental actions as mind, intellect and consciousness never take
place 23). Wherever no mental action takes place, there is no false
imagination by which they would think irrationally. One who
applies himself with rational thought never makes Ignorance arise.
Non-arising of Ignorance means non-arising of the Twelve Parts
of Existence (dvādaśa-bhavânga) 24). It is called 'non-birth(ajāti) 25).""
and so forth.
Also said [in the scripture] 26).
“ O Lord, extinction of Suffering does not mean the disappea-
rance of element. By the term, • Extinction of Suffering ’, 0
Lord, there is designated the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata
which is beginningless 27), immutable, of no birth, non-originated,
of no destruction, free from destruction, eternal, constant, quie-
scent, everlasting 28), purified by nature, released from covering of
22) JAA 247 a. Cf. AAS (beginning of Chap. II, p. 469 b) BGś quotes the first sen-
tence from AĀS and regards the remaining as its own explanation. (BGŚ 801 c).
23) citta-mano-vijñāna, T. sems dan yid dan rnam-par ses-pa, C. '
(but AĀS & BGś, UB). These three are synonymous with each other and here
seem to have no special meaning as in the Vijñānavāda. (in BGś, however, Paramārtha
interprets that 'citta' means the “former' (i.e. the usual set of) 6 vijñānas,
*ādāna-vijñāna ', and 'vijñāna', ‘ālayavijñāna'. It is quite against the Vijñānavā-
din's way of interpretation.)
24) i. e. the chain of causation (pratītyasamutpāda), starting with “avidyā’.
25) T. mi-skye(-ba), C. FILE # (BGś T ). ajāti” = “ anutpūdânirodha ’. The
term 'ajāti' reminds us of the idealistic philosophy of Gauda pāda.
26) ŚMS 221 c. Cf. BGŚ 801 (quotation from ŚMS).
27) anādikālika, T. thog-ma med-paủi dus-can, C. file that the third ti *). This
is usually an adjective to dhātu'. See S. p. 72, l. 13.
28) These 4, nitya, dhruva, śiva, & śāśvata, (T. rtag-pa, brtan-pa, shi-ba, mi-hjig-pa;
c. O Tires are often used in this treatise as the modifiers of “dharma.
kāya' or the Absolute Truth. See below (S. p. 20, 1. 10; p. 53, vv. 81, 82, p. 54, 1. 12 ff.,
etc.) Cf. AAS (which has the passage after 'asaņskȚta’ up to the end of this quo-
tation), , respectively (496 b) BGS TE TERME (801 c).
[ 167 ]



J. TAKASAKI
all moral defilements, and endowed with inseparable and unthinka-
ble qualities of the Buddha, which are far more than the sands of
the Gangā in number 29). And this very Absolute Body of the Ta-
thāgata, O Lord, [when it is) unreleased from the covering of moral
defilements, is called the Matrix of Tathāgata. ” 30)
Thus all the determination of the Truth of Extinction of Suffering should
be understood wholly and in detail according to Sūtras.
§ 4. The Doctrine as the Truth of Path 31).
4) śuddhi, 5) abhivyaktikaraṇa & 6) pratipakşatā: Now indeed, the
way to attain the Absolute Body of Tathāgata named Extinction of
Suffering is the Path of perception and practice 32) based upon the non-
discriminative Wisdom (avikalpa-jñāna) 33). And this [Path) is to be known
as similar to the sun with threefold common characteristics 34). [Namely)
1) through the common characteristic of purity of the disk, because of
being apart from all the minor defilements and stains; 2) through the
common characteristic of being the manifestor of forms, because of mak-
ing manifest knowable things of all kinds; and 3) through the common
29)
.
gatas.
gangāvālikāvyativșttair avinirbhāgair acintyair buddhadharmaiḥ samanvā-
For this expression, see Note 1-23. (quotation from AAN). The term amuk-
tajñair' had better be inserted after ' avinirbhāgair ', because, except the present Skt.
text and T., all other editions i.e. C., ŚMS (both T. & C.), AĀS & BGś, have this term.
(c. Tihti); ŚMS, T. brol-bar šes-pa (= muktaj ña), c. ; AÁS;
TV BGś the last two seem to show the best translation.)
The term “ samanvāgata’ makes the idea signified by “gangāvālikā ... quite clear.
30) tathāgatakāyo 'vinirmuktakleśakośas tathāgatagarbhaḥ This is a famous
definition of the term tathāgatagarbha”. Chinese refer to this often by the
Æf
31) Cf. BGś 802 a (X !!).
32) darśana-mārga, T. mthon-baħi lam, C. i ; & bhāvanā-mārga, T.
L; & bhāvanā-mārga, T. sgom-pași
lam, C. T ii. darśana-mārga' signifies the first Stage of the Bodhisattva, and
bhāvanā-mārga’ those Stages after the second one.
mi-rtog-paḥi ye-ses, C c. The 5 SD
34) Similarity of ‘jñāna’ to the sun is also referred to in S. p. 58, vv. 93 ff.,
p. 107 ff. (sūryavad iti, and forth), etc.
33) T. rnam-par
[ 168 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
characteristic of hostility against darkness, because of being the enemy
of all kinds of obstacles against the true perception 35).
And 'bondage '(vibandha) 36) means the origination of Desire, Hatred
and Ignorance 37) preceded by the thought 38) which takes its basis fof
cognition] upon the characteristic of unreal things 39). It is due to the
union of the state of tendency (anuśaya) with manifested state (paryut-
thāna) [of defilement] 40). Indeed, people regard the unreal, i.e., 'not of
its nature (atatsvabhāva) ’ thing as the [real] characteristic because of
its desirable looks (śubhâkāra) 41) when Desire comes forth from its state
of tendency; when Hatred comes torth [from its state of tendency], [they
regard the unreal thing as the real characteristic) because of its detestable
looks (pratighâkāreņa); and when Ignorance comes forth, then it is the
same because of its obscure looks (avidyâkāreņa). And of those people who
37)
.
38)
6
35) T. de-kho-na mthon-ba (= tattva-darśana). By reason of this T. translation
as well as by the reading " sarvâkārasya tattvadarśanavibandhasya ’in S. p. 13, 1. 17, the
uncertain passage in Ms. B. (see J. fn. 8 in S. p. 12) should be read
satya ’ inserted by J. C. has no equivalent term, but BGś, LL.
36) T. gegs, C. Eli ya £ (the thing to be dispelled), BGś P B. This word
seems to stand for timira' in the kārikā.
rāga, T. ḥdod-chags, c. ; dveşa, T. she-sdaň, c. moha, T. gti-mug, C. YEE
respectively.
manasikāra, T. yid-la byed-pa, C.
虛妄分別念, As being based upon
the unreal feature, it should be ayoniśomanasikāra’ in its implied sense. Or ‘ayoniso
manasikāra? abhūtavastu-nimitta-ārambaņa-manasikāra’. See below.
39) abhūta-vastu-nimitta-ārambaņa, T. yan-dag-pa ma-yin-paḥi dros-po rgyu-
mtshan-gyi yul, c. IX Tm #1. T. regards the term “ārambana' as 'vişaya' (sense
object) and connects it with 'abhūta-vastu-nimitta’ by the genitive case. As for the rela-
tion of this ‘ārambaņa' to 'manasikāra’, T. seems to regard it as being appositional.
On the contrary, C. understands ‘ārambaņa' in the sense of “taking hold of' or 'grasping’:
This verbal sense seems better here than the nominal sense, because “arāmbaņa’ is a
kind of act, determining the characteristic of ' manasikāra'. In other words, manasi-
kāra' here is determined as abhūtavastunimitta-ārambaņa', i.e. the act of taking
hold of “abhūtavastu-nimitta' (as real]. From the point of Skt. grammar, however,
the compound ‘abhūta ārambaņa’, being appositional to manasikāra’, makes
a Bahuvrihi compound, and hence is to be understood in the sense •[manasikūra]
whose ārambaņa is abhūtavastu-nimitta’ and ‘ārambaņa' can be translated into
object ’. If we construe T. translation in the light of this Skt. way, should
be inserted after “yul'.
40) anuśaya, T. bag-la ñal-ba, C. i Ki Me (but usually IFE) sleeping
state, potential state'; and for paryutthāna, T. kun-nas ldan-pa. C. om. (but usu-
ally ) = paryavasthāna (S. 67, 1. 17). See note IX-77.
41) For · śubhâkāra ', c. ?
sense-
2
can
[ 169 ]
.



J. TAKASAKI
incorrectly take hold of characteristics of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance
as the basis of cognition 42), the Irrational Thought occupies their mind. For
those people whose mind is occupied with the Irrational Thought, there
takes place the Defilement of any one of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance.
Due to this [origination of Defilement], they make the actions born of
Desire by means of body, speech and thought, and also [in the same way)
they produce the action born of Hatred, the action born of Ignorance.
Furthermore, from Action there results Rebirth. Thus these people,
having tendencies [of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance], regarding the
[unreal] characteristic [as real], and making it the basis of cognition,
[affectionally] hanging on it 43), produce the Irrational Thought, from which
consequently arises Defilement. Because of origination of Defilement,
there arises Action; from the origination of Action, there arises Rebirth.
And all kinds of impurity (samkleśa) 44) of these Defilements, Action Re-
birth, etc. come forth because people do not know, nor perceive the one
[real] essence 45) as it is 46).
42) rāgadveșamoha-nimittam ayathābhūtam ārambaņam kurvatām.
Here, for · ārambana’, T. dmigs-pa, C. as before (UX). ayathābhūtam can be regarded
as an adjective to ārambana, but from the context, I rendered it into an adverbal sense.
43) Here ordinary beings (bala) are said to be • anuśayavat ', ‘nimitta-grāhin
and 'ārambaņa-carita'. (C. om. the latter two). For ‘nimitta-grāhin', T. mtshan-par
ḥdsin-pa-can, and for ‘ārambaņa-carita' T. dmigs-pa-la spyod-pa. Here ārambaņa
seems to show more clearly the sense of an action to hang on '. These three show
successive activities of mind preceding to manasikāra”. Cf. BGŚ 802 a:
a: LA BASE
(tattvadarśana-vibandha) W, LE KIT M , X , # # #. IL
EN DIT SE I (anu śaya) fi. they **, TE EM
(ayonişomanasikāra) The LL L LLE, LE
(The tattvadarśanavibandha means (1) a complexed action of mind, (2) kleśa-sam-
kleśa, (3) karma-samkleśa, and (4) janma-samklesa. [Of them), (1) a complexed action
of mind is [a mental activity], of which the Defilements in dormant state are causes,
affections towards the five sense-objects are conditions, and the Irrational Thought is
the cause of associated origination. Because of the association of these three, it is called
a complexed action of mind ').
44) samklesa, T. kun-nas ñon-mons-pa, C. UE). A general term for klesa,
karman & janman, etc., i. e. all the phenomenal life.
45) eka-dhātu, C. — TE PT, (BGś
- TE , (BGś — ) T. khams gcig. It
) T. khams gcig. It may be termed
dharmadhātu, dharmatā, i. e. the Absolute. It is also identical with cittaprakſti.
46) About the process of origination of the phenomenal life (samkleśa) see S. p. 42 f.
(v. 58 f.). In this process,
In this process, ‘ayoniśomanasikāra' occupies the important role, and
this ' ayoniśomanasikāra ’ is defined as “vikalpa' (S. p. 12, l. 2) or . abhūtavastunimit-
târambaņa-manasikāra ’ (S. p. 13, 1. 1) (see Note 38, 39). The function of ' ayoniśomana-
sikūra' is to be compared to that of 'manas' in the Vijñānavāda.
[ 170 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhā ga
[On the other hand] these impurities should be seen in the same man-
ner as by a perfect investigator 47) who does not perceive any [unreal] cha-
racteristic nor any basis of these impurities. (Because], when he perceives
neither characteristic nor basis, then can he perceive the Reality 48). Thus,
these elements 49) are perfectly realized by the Tathāgata as equal through
equality 50). And thus, this realization of all natures by Wisdom, as being
equal without any addition nor diminution because of these two facts,
i.e. because we cannot see any characteristic nor basis of non-being 51), and
we can see the real character of being as the absolute truth, this is to be
known as the 'enemy' (pratipaksa) of all kinds of obstacles against the
true perception. And because of the origination of this enemy, there is
absolutely no association nor harmony 52) of the obstacles. This is indeed
the Path of perception and practice based upon the non-discriminative
Wisdom, which is the cause of attaining the Absolute Body [of the Tathā-
gata] and which is to be understood in detail according to the Sūtra
named Prajñāpāramitā 53).
47) parigaveşayat (one who investigates) (< p. pres. of parigaveșayati, caus. of pari-
gaveşate, seeks for, investigates. BHS Dic. 8. v.), T. yons-su btsal-ba, C. .
For • nimittam ārambaņam vā’, T. rgyu-mtshan nam dmigs-pa, c. Hx (as if
• nimittârambana’ as in the previous cases). Here the use of ‘ārambaņa’ is obviously
objective.
48) bhūta, T. yan-dag-pa, c.TE PE.
40) dharmāḥ (pl.), c. , but BGś — tJ (sarvadharmāḥ).
60) By the term “iti', the content of realization is shown.
51) asad nimittârambaņa, which had literally better be translated into “unreal basis
of characteristics ’. (Skt. has the sg. g. case-ending) T. med-paủi rgyu-mtshan-gyi dmigs-pa
and C. E EU (unreal characteristics of things) and om. ārambaņa.
52) asamgati, T. bral-ba; asamavadhāna, T. med-pa; C. TEL for both
together.
e. g. Așțasāhasrikā-Prajñāpāramitā (Wogihara's Edition of AAA pp. 332, 1. 9–12;
333, 1. 4-7 & 11-15; 334, 1. 2–5 & 15-16; 334, 1. 22–335, 1. 1; 353, 1. 12– 14 & 17-18; 354,
1. 5-9). Cf. AAA (GOS Edition, p. 230 ff. where a passage from ASP is quoted, for which
the original reading is as follows:
tatra bodhisattvayānikaḥ pudgalo yair vastubhiḥ anumodeta yair ārambanair
yair ākārais tac cittam utpādayet api nu tāni vastūni tāni vā ārambaņāni te vā ākārās tathô-
palabhyeran yathā nimittīkaroti ”. (Wogihara, p. 332, 1. 9-12).
C. inserts a short quotation, running:
"I kn ko * 6 kp FA FIE 1". (e. g. Taisho,
VIII, p. 335 b).
53)
[ 171 )



IV. THE JEWEL OF THE COMMUNITY
Now, from the Jewel of the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle, there
arises the Jewel of the Community of Bodhisattvas who are abiding in
the irreversible state 1). Therefore, immediately after [the explanation
of] the former, we have one śloka referring to the latter.
(Kārikā 3.)
I bow before those who, having understood 2) perfectly
The extremity of non-substantiality of all the worlds as quiescent,
Because of their perception of the unreality 3) of defilements
Through the brightness of the innate pure mind of all the world 4),
Perceive the Buddhahood 5) penetrating everywhere;
Those whose intellect is unobscured,
And whose eye of Wisdom has its objects
In the pureness and infinitude of the living beings. || 13 ||
1) avaivartika (= avinivartaniya), T. phyir mi-ldog-pa, c.TR . About the
equivalence of this state to the Bodhisattva’s ‘bhūmi' or 'vihāra’, there is a variety
among the Mahāyāna texts. At the beginning of the development of the 'bhūmi’ theory,
there seems to have been 4 divisions of states on account of the Bodhisattva's rank, namely:
prathamacittôtpädika, caryāpratipanna, avaivartika & ekajātipratibaddha or abhișeka (of
these 4, see S. p. 52, 1. 16 ff.). Besides this division, the division of 10 stages also seems
to have an old history and as a result of the combination of both, the former 4 have
got their place among 10 stages, being ranked as the 1st, 3rd, 7th & 10th, respectively.
Confusion occurred after the apperance of the Avatamsakasūtra which established the
41 stages of Bodhisattva , ranking the old 10 stages at the beginning under the name
of 10 'vihāra's, and newly creating the 10 ‘bhūmi's, Pramuditā & c. as the highest group
of Bodhisattva's stages. As for ' avaivartika', it is regarded on one hand as the name
for the 7th 'vihāra’, but on another hand, as being equivalent sometimes to the 1st bhūmi,
sometimes to the 7th bhūmi. Here the commentator seems to have used the term ' avai-
vartika’ as indicating the Bodhisattva on the 1st bhūmi. (Cf. S. p. 15, 1. 13). See S. p. 16,
1. 13; Notes IV-31.
2) prati-vidh, T. rtogs(-pa), C. (or II).
3) asvabhāva, T. no-bo-med[-pa], C. FETT.
4) tat’ of the 2nd line of v. 13 indicates . sarvajagat ' in the 1st line, the ‘jagat'
means “people in the world ’.
6) sambuddhatā, T. rdsogs-paḥi sars-rgyas (om. -tā), c. C. has
some misunderstanding on the third line and due to this misunderstanding, C. changes
the order of the commentary.
[ 172 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
$ 1. Manner and Extent of the Perception of the Community.
What is shown by this śloka?
Because of its purity of perception by introspective knowledge,
So far as its manner and extent are concerned 6),
The Community of irreversible Bodhisattvas
[Is endowed] with the supreme qualities 7). || 14 ||
By this it is explained, in brief, that the Jewel of the Community
of irreversible Bodhisattvas is endowed with supreme qualities, because
of its purity of perception by supermundane knowledge, with respect to
two aspects, [manner and extent] i.e. "being as it is' (yathāvad-bhāvikata
and ‘being as far as (yāvad-bhāvikatā) 8).
>
h
6) yathāvad-yāvat, T. ji-bshin, ji-sñed, c. kp and om. yāvat.
7). C. refers only to ‘yathāvat’ here, and consequently replaces the following prose
commentary before v. 16.
8) T. ji-Ita-ba-bshin-yod-pa & ji-sñed-yod-pa, respectively: C. BH TITLE TT &
TEE TT, , resp. C. LE TT' for ' bhāvikatā” is probably a misreading, but see
BGŚ 802 b where these two are said to be the cause of ' virāgadharma' representing 'bhā-
vanā-mārga’ under the names of KP ET TILE & kp LE. This term is
however, replaced by * after the next occurrence (KH & RH.
Cf. AĀS KH , ku (470 c); Yogācārabhūmi (Bodhisattvabhūmi) ku Ji24
& Elf Tip (Taisho, XXX, 486 b etc., BBh, p. 39, 11. 1-2, 215, 1. 2, 258, 11. 5-9);
Sandhinirmocanasūtra, T. ji-Ita-ba bshin-du yod-pa-ñid & ji-sñed yod-pa-ñid (Lamotte's
edition, p. 98 & 99), c. ko bf &f fj PE (Taisho, XVI, 699 c). As
for their meanings, Sandhinirmocana defines them, “kun-nas ñon-mons-pa dan rnam-
par byan-baḥi chos rnams-la rnam-pa rab-tu dbye-ba thams-cad-kyi mthar thug-pa
gan-yin-pa de-ni ji-sñed-yod-pa yin ?, & 'kun-nas ñon-mons-pa dan rnam-par
byan-baḥi chos de-dag ñid-kyi de-bshin-ñid gan-yin-pa de-ni ji-lta-ba bshin-du yod-
pa-ñid yin ...', respectively. It means yāvadbhāvikatā' signifies all phenomena,
pure and impure, while ‘yathāvadhbāvikatā' signifies the essence or the Absolute
(tathatā) inherent in all phenomena. While the Bodhisattvabhūmi says that yathā-
vadbhāvikatā of dharmas means their bhūtatā’, and yāvadbhāvikatā of dharmas means
sarvatā, by both of which the two kinds of tattvârtha’ are represented. It seems
to show the original sense of these terms. On the other hand, O translates the
terms into • Absolute and Empirical character', i.e. as if ‘yathāvad-bh.' signified
paramârtha-satya’, while ‘yāvad-bh. ', samvști-satya’. This is the traditional way
of interpretation in Tibet. But as far as this text is concerned, both of these relate
to · lokottara-jñāna' or 'lokottara-prajñā’ (S. p. 14, 1-19, p. 15, 1. 11), i.e.
avikalpa-
jñāna’ and not to laukika tatprsthalabdha-jñāna'. This is rather close to the
original interpretation, the only special feature being that the ‘ yāvad-bh. ’ is said to
relate to the perception of 'tathāgatagarbha-astitva’ in all living beings. Therefore, O's
way seems an overinterpretation.
or
[ 173 ]



J. TAKASAKI
a) Right Manner of Perception (yathāvad-bhāvikatā).
Their manner [of perception] is ' as it is ,
Because they have understood the quiescent nature 9) of the world,
And this [understanding] is caused by
The purity [of the innate mind) and
Their perception of the defilement as being destroyed from the
Loutset 10). // 15 //
Here, 'being as it is (yathāvad-bhāvikatā)’ should be understood thus:
because, [with respect to the manner), they i.e. Bodhisattvas) have under-
stood the extremity of non-substantiality (nairātmyakoți) of the whole world
called Individualities and Separate Elements (pudgala-dharma-ākhya) as
it is (yathāvat). And this understanding, relating to the non-annihila-
tion 11) of Individualities and Separate Elements because of their nature
of absolute quiescence from the outset, is produced, in short, by two
causes. Namely, because of their perception of the innate brightness
(prakſtiprabhāsvaratā) 12) of the mind, and because of their perception of
' being destroyed from the outset' (ādikşaya), i.e. the extinction of defi-
lements on the mind. Here, these two, i.e. the innate brightness of the
mind and the defilement on the mind, are quite difficult to be understood
in relation to the fact that, in the immaculate sphere, there is no succes-
sion of a second mind because both minds, good and bad, act together
as one and the same. Therefore, it is said 13):
“O Lord, a good mind is momentary 14); it cannot be afflicted by
defilements. The bad mind is [also] momentary; even this [bad]
mind cannot be afflicted by defilements. O Lord, defilements cannot
») sānta-dharmatā, T. shi-baủi chos-ñid, c. I. This is a word
for ' śivā nairātmyakoți ’ in k. 3.
10) ūdikşaya, T. gdod-nas zad, C. # * SITE.
11) avināśa, which shows the denial of the conception of destroying something.
See S. p. 12, 1. 4–5 (on ' nirodha-satya '). T. ḥjig-pa med-pa. C. has a long interpretation:
如實知無始世來本來寂靜無我無法,非滅煩惱證
this to (Real perception means the perception of the non-existence and quiescence
of individuality and separate element from the outset, and not such a perception as
existing after the realization by dispelling the defilements.
Here, 'avināśa ādikșaya, nirodha, niņsvabhāva.
12) T. rai-bshin-gyis hod–gsal-ba(-ñid), c. (= prakſtipariſuddhi).
18) ŚMS 222 b.
14) kşaņika, T. skad-cig-ma, C. FIJ E .
[ 174 )



The Ratnagotra vibhāga
touch that mind. [And the mind cannot be touched by the Defi-
lements) 15). O Lord, how is it possible that the mind, of unto-
uchable character 16), can be afflicted by darkness? O Lord, still
there is defilement and there is defiled mind. Moreover, O Lord,
the meaning that the mind purified by nature is defiled 17) is dif-
ficult to be understood ”.
Thus, with reference to [the manner of] “ being as it is ’, the explana-
tion of the meaning difficult to be understood’ should be understood
in detail according to the Sūtra.
b) Unlimited Extent of Perception (yāvad-bhāvikatā).
Their extent [of perception] is as far as ’,
Because they perceive the existence
Of the nature of Omniscience 18) in all living beings,
By the intellect 19) reaching as far as
the limit of the knowable 20). || 16 ||
Here, 'being as far as (yāvadbhāvikatā) should be understood thus:
because [with respect to the extent], they perceive the existence of the
Matrix of the Tathāgata in all living beings, up to those who are in the
animal kingdom, by means of the supermundane intellect (lokottara-prajñā)
which reaches as far as the limit of all knowable things 21). And this
perception of Bodhisattvas takes place in the first Stage of the Bodhisa-
ttva, because [verily in that Stage), the Absolute Essence is realized
in the sense of all-pervading' (sarvatraga).
15) Acc. to T. & C., one sentence should be added here (as in brackets). T. sems ñon-
mons-pa yan ma-lags na, C. The kit Me nâpi citta m samklistam bhavati.
16) asparśa-dharmin, T. reg-paại chos-can ma lags-pa, c.T.
17) The reading upakleśârtho ’ is preferably to be corrected into “upakliştârtho '.
Cf. S. p. 22, 1. 2, cittasy ôpakliştatā dușprativedhyā.
18) sarvajña-dharmatā tathāgatagarbha (in the comm.)
19) dhi = prajñā (lokottara prajñā).
20) C. in prose: LE TT (yāvadbhāvikatā) , + — tij
界故 (jieya-puryantagatnyc), 見一切眾生有一切智故 (souriusatresu
sarvaj ñâstitvadarśanāt). (*dhyā’ in the 1st line and dharmatā' in the 2nd line are
omitted).
21) Cf. S. p. 22, 10 ~ 24, 9 (Quotation from Avat S. Tathôgatótpattisambhava-
nirdeśa).
[ 175 ]



J. TAKASAKI
6
§ 2. Introspective Character of Bodhisattva's Perception.
Thus, what is called “understanding in such a way ’,
That is the perception by one's own wisdom.
It is pure in the Immaculate Sphere,
Because it is free from attachment
and has no hindrance 22). || 17 ||
Thus, in such a way' (ity evam), by this way, i.e. through “ being as
it is ’ and being as far as '; what is called “understanding' (avabodha) of
the supermundane path, is here intended to be the perception of the
Saints by the supermundane wisdom of their own (pratyātmam), i.e. unco-
mon to others 23). And this (perception] is called perfectly pure in com-
parison with 24) the superficial knowledge of everyday life 25) because, in
brief, of two reasons. Which ones? Because it is free from any attach-
ment' (asanga), and because it has no hindrance' (apratihata) 26). Here,
as its field is the innate purity of the essence of living beings through its
being as it is, the perception [of the Saints] is free from any attachment;
and through its being as far as, its field is the unlimited number of
knowable objects, therefore, that perception has no hindrance 27).
§ 3. Superiority of Bodhisattva's Community.
Through the purity of their perception by wisdom 28),
It is superior as [being the same as] Buddha's Wisdom 29)
22) C. again in prose.
23) i. e. uncommon to Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas and ordinary people. c. T
# E *
24) upanidhāya, T. -- la ltos-nas.
25) itara-prādesika-jñāna, T., cig-śes ñi-tshe-baħi ye-ses. C. takes it as showing
the knowledge of Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, 聲聞辟支佛證智,
26) asanga, T. chags-pa med-pa, C. FIE B; apratihata (apratigha in the verse),
T. thogs-pa med-pa, c. SE U (= FILE THE); BGS TE & FILE TUE, respectively.
27) BGŚ adds some more sentences on “yathāvad-bhāvikatā' and ' yāvad-bhāvikatā ',
saying that the former is 'hetu', while the latter is ' phala', or in comparison with the
nature of ' viśuddhi-hetu of the former, the latter is ‘paripūrņa-hetu' (802 b).
28) The shortage of syllables after “...suddhyā’ can be made up by “hi’or eva
(suddhyaiva). T. has 'na' after 'dag-pas ’.
29) For v. 18 a b, c. kp n L L (H) (Because of
their perception of pure 'buddhajñāna’ through the Path of the true intuition).
C. has no word equivalent to ·
anuttarā" in the verse, but in the commentary
shows it.
[ 176 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
Therefore, the Saints abiding in the irreversible state 30)
Are [worthy of being] the refuge of all living beings. || 18 ||
Thus, this 'purity of perception by wisdom' of Bodhisattvas who
mounted to the Stage of being irreversible 31) is to be known as the
supreme', because it approached 32) the highest purity of the perception
of Buddha's Wisdom; or otherwise 33), because it is superior to the other
qualities of Bodhisattva, donation, moral conduct, etc. 34). On account
of this purity, it is said that Bodhisattvas in the irreversible state are
worthy of being the refuge of all living beings.
There is no mention of the Jewel of Community of the Srāvakas,
immediately after the Jewel of Community of the Bodhisattvas, because
the former is not worthy of being worshipped 35). Indeed, there is no
wise man who, having known the distinction of qualities between Bodhi-
sattvas and Śrāvakas, casting off the new-moon-like Bodhisattvas, who
this
sense,
30) The reading "avaivartyād bhavanty āryāḥ' should be corrected into avaivar-
tyā bhavanty āryāḥ'acc. to both T. & C.
31) avinivartaniyabhūmi-samārudhānām bodhisattvānām, c. U tom
EL TRE. It is clear that avinirvartaniya-bhūmi is here regarded
as the 1st bhūmi of Bodhisattva on which stage he accomplishes 'darśana-mārga'. In
the term 'jñānadarśanasiddhi’ has the implied meaning of 'darśanamārga'
as in C. translation of v. 18.
32) upanişadgata, T. ñe-bar gnas-par ḥgyur-ba. Cf. AA III, 2. samyag-āsannatô-
ditaḥ (produced by sitting perfectly near).
33) vā, T. (r)am (after phyir) It denotes another interpretation of 'anuttarā'.
34) The first two of the 6 pāramitās are mentioned.
35) C. has one verse on the superiority of bodhisattva-sanga from 10 points, and a
prose commentary thereon. It seems the present Skt text is lacking one paragraph
which was in the original text of C. translation. 10 points of superiority mentioned
in C. are as follows:
1)
L. vişaya ’, (),
superiority in perception of objects; 2) IHAN
guņāh, (IH POV), sup. in qualities; 3) Padhigama, ), sup. in
acquisition; 4)
Wnirvāṇa, (2 l), sup. in Nirvāṇa as being obtained after
salvation of all living beings; 5) bhūmayaḥ, HD ), sup. in their
Stages; 6) # THE HER
śuddhi, amata, Li #),
sup. in purity; 7) titi Et
sampūrņā,-mahākaruņā, 4 W),
sup. in their compassionate mind
regarding people equally; 8) # ko * * jātis tathāgatakule, (# ), sup. in
their birth, because their birth is ajāti (Title #) in its ultimate sense; 9) LE
# ii vasitâbhijñāsampad, (Tóth to F), sup. in their supernatural powers, 10 vasitās,
6 abhijñās, etc.; 10)
#HE E anuttara-phala, W) sup. in the ac-
complishment being the Supreme Enlightenment. (letters in parentheses show the
terms in commentary).
[ 177 ]



J. TAKASAKI
have the lustre-disk of Wisdom and Compassion filling with great accu-
mulation of merits and knowledge 36) for the Great Enlightenment, and
are standing in the illumination over the group existence (gaņa-samtāna) 37)
of innumerable living beings and entering the way favourable for going
toward the full-moon of the supreme Tathāgata, tries to bow before the
Śrāvakas, who in their turn, although having attained certain limited
superficial knowledge 38), are standing in the illumination for their own
existence (sva-samtāna) like stars 39). Indeed, even those Bodhisattvas
who have resolved to attain the Enlightenment for the first time 40) by
the quality based upon the purity of altruistic intention, can overcome
the holy Śrāvakas who are pitiless 41), indifferent to the nourishment of
others 42), although having attained perfect purity of immaculate moral
conduct and discipline 43). How much more is the case of the other
qualities of Bodhisattvas, 10 Controlling Powers, 44) etc. ? Really, it will
be said 45):
36)
punya-jñāna-sambhāra, T. bsod-nams dan ye-ses-kyi tshogs, C. om. (usually,
*** & ****. Of the 6 pāramitās, prajñā-pāramitā is called “jñānasam-
bhāra’, and the other 5 are called 'punya-s'.
37) C.
LE RETT FA A (gahaņa-samtāna?), T. om. The meaning is clear
as being compared with “svasamtāna 'in case of Śrāvakas.
38) prādesika-jñāna. See above (Note IV–25).
38) The whole passage illustrates the comparison between Buddhas, Bodhisattvas
and Śrāvakas by an example of moon and stars, saying that the Buddha is like the full
moon, Bodhisattvas are like the new moon; both of them have illumination for others,
while the Śrāvakas, being like stars, have light only for their own illumination.
40) prathamacittôtpädika ... bodhisattva, T. sems dan-po bskyed-paḥi byan-chub-
sems-dpaḥ, c. Bl these e DJ ).
41) niranukrosa, T. rjes-su brtse-ba med-pa, C. om.
42) ananyapoșiganya, T. gshan rgyas-par byed-pa mi-Idan-pa, c.Tu
Tube 4. c. f' for poșin' is probably a misreading for · poșa',
which, in its turn, has the same sense as puruşa’ in BHS. See BHS Dic. 8. v.
samvara, T. sdom-pa (FI)). See BHS. D. Silasamvara (under samvara [1]).
44) 10 vasitās are namely: 1) āyur-vasitā, 2) citta–V., 3) parişkāra-v. (wealth), 4)
karma-v., 5) upapatti-v., 6) adhimukti-v., 7) dharma-v., 8) praņidhāna-v., 9) ddhi-v.,
& 10) jñāna-v., (Mvyut. 27).
45) • vaksyati hi’ in S. shows that the following verses belong to the same text, but
not to a quotation from another scripture. Though both T. & C. regard only the following
verse as a quotation (T. gan-gi phyir ..shes-gśad-do, C. to the ), it
seems that
the whole passage after na hi jātu paņditā' (Indeed, there is no wise man who ...)
up to the end of the verse is a long quotation from some Sūtra (source unknown). The
style of these passages seems near to the sūtra style. If it be so, the passage only
available in C will be ascertained to be the original śāstra passage for which this long
quotation is mentioned as the authority.
6
43)
[ 178 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
One who feeds 46) moral conduct for his own sake,
Apart from compassion on the living beings of bad conduct 47),
And who is endowed with pure wealth of moral conduct only for
his own nourishment, 48)
Such a saint is never called a man of pure conduct.
One who, having aroused the highest Compassion toward others
And having accepted the moral conduct,
Renders services for others' livelihood like fire, wind, water
and earth,
Such a one is a [real] moral man, and others are of sham 49) morality.
46) bibharti (Pres. 3 sg. of bhr), T. rnam-rgyas–śin (= viv;ddhyā?), C. LETT.
47) praśuddha, T. rab-dag-pa, C. om.
48) ātmambhari, (lit. nourishing oneself, one who nourishes himself) T. bdag-ñid
rgyas-byed, c. Il est
49) pratirūpaka T.
gzugs-brñen, C. 19! #
g
[ 179 ]
13



V. THE THREE JEWELS AS REFUGES
Now, for what purpose and for the sake 1) of whom did the Lord
teach 2) the 3 Refuges (saraņa-traya)?
In order to show (the virtues of] 3)
The Teacher, the Teaching and Disciples,
With reference to those who belong to 3 Vehicles
And to those who devote themselves to religious observance 4)
Three Refuges were taught 2) [by the Lord]. // 19 // Lin 3 forms,
§ 1. 3 Refuges from the Empirical Standpoint.
The teaching: “ the Buddha is a Refuge because he is the highest
among human beings ” 5); it was established 2), in order to show the virtue
of the Teacher (śāsts), for the sake of those people who approached the
nature of Buddha 6) i.e. who belong to the Vehicle of Bodhisattva ?) and
those [people who] devote themselves to the highest religious observance
of the Buddha.
The teaching: “ the Doctrine is a Refuge because it is the highest
of what are devoid of passions "; it was established, in order to show the
1) 'adhikſtya' has a more concrete sense than usual here. T. 'dban-du byas-nas '
as usual, but c.
TA) (for the sake of).
2) prajñapta (made known taught), C. F. But, T. rnam-par gshag-pa (vyava-
sthita) in the introductory sentence and in v. 19. In the commentary, however, there
is used · desitam prajñaptam ', for which T. bstan-shin rnam-par gshag-go, C. A M.
It seems that the term prajñapta' has both senses here.
3) arthena
guna-udbhāvanârthena (in the comm.).
a) kāra (BHS), C. (
H. (= pūjā, `homage, worship ) (Cf. BHS Dic. s. v.).
Usually this term is accompanied by “kriyā' and other forms delivered from kļ as in
the
prose comm. T. translation "byed' or 'bya-ba byed' shows nothing special.
b) dvipada. It is interpreted doctrinally that the Buddha is standing on the basis
of 'jñāna' and 'karuņā'. (T. rkan-gñis rnams, c. H ).
6) buddhabhāva (= bodhi), T. sans-rgyas-kyi dros-po-niid, c. 7.
7) The reading is preferably bodhisattva-yānikān' instead of “bodhisattvān' in
comparison with the uses of ‘pratyekabuddhayānikān' and 'śrāvakayānikān' in the
following paragraphs. Also, T. byan-chub-seems-dpaủi theg-pa-baḥi.
[ 180 ]



The Rat na gotravibhā g a
virtue of the Teaching (śāsana) of the Teacher, for the sake of those
people who approach the enlightenment of profound Doctrine of the depen-
dent origination by [depending on] themselves 8), i.e. who belong to the
Vehicle of the Pratyekabuddha and those who are devotees to the highest
religious observance of the Doctrine.
The teaching: “the Community [of the disciples) is a Refuge because
it is the highest of communities ”9); it was established, in order to show the
virtue of Disciples (sisya) well enrolled in the Teaching of the Teacher,
for the sake of those people who approach in order to understand the
voice heard from others, i.e. who belong to the Vehicle of Śrāvaka, and
those who are devotees to the highest religious observance in the
Community.
Thus, in short, for these three purposes, for the sake of six kinds
of people, distinctively did the Lord establish the teaching of these three
Refuges from the empirical standpoint 10), in order to make living beings
enter the regular method 11).
§ 2. The Doctrine and Community are not the Ultimate Refuges.
As being abandoned, being of deceptive nature,
Being non-existence and being possessed of fear 12), (respectively),
The two kinds of Doctrine and the Community
Are ultimately not the highest Refuge. // 20 //
10)
11)
8) Ms.B reading "svayam gambhira-pratitya-dharmânubodha' is preferable. T. •ran-
ñid rten-ħbrel-gyi chos zab-mo rje-su rtogs-pa ...', c. O AIT, TA 2 411,
* £.
Here, pratitya’ (T. rten-ḥbrel, C. E ***) seems to mean pratitya
samutpāda'. Pretyekabuddha is said to be a buddha who enlightened the doctrine of
pratītyasamutpāda.
9) About these three formulae on ratna-traya', see Mvyut. 267.
sam vrti-pada-sthānena. That is to say, from the empirical standpoint, there
are 3 Refuges, but from the highest standpoint, only the Buddha is the Refuge. See
below.
anupūrvanaya. T. equals ‘yāna' instead of “naya’, but C. *. "The regular
method' means “from the lower standard to the higher standard, i.e. from being adhi-
mukta to yānika, from sanga-sarana to buddha-sarana, from śrāvakayāna to bodhisatt-
vayāna, according to the faculties of living beings.
12) For these four reasons, the terms used in S. T. & C. are as follows:
1) tyājya (T. span, C. PS );
2) moşadharma (T. slu-baại chos-can, c. );
abhāva (T. med. C. FILE US);
4) sabhaya (T. hjigs-daň bcas-pa, c. l ).
T. (D.). reading, .sdan’ is to be corrected into • span' (fut. of span-ba ').
3)
[ 181 ]



J. TAKASAKI
The Doctrine has two kinds, i.e. the Doctrine as Teaching (deśa-
nādharma) and the Doctrine as Realization (adhigamadharma) 13). Of them,
the Doctrine as Teaching is (the Doctrine] of sūtra and other teachings
and it consists of the collection 14) of name, word, and letter. And it is
said that this Teaching is akin to the boat 15) because it ends 16) with
the acquisition 17) of the Path. The Doctrine as Realization is (again]
twofold by the division of cause and result. That is to say, the Truth
of Path and the Truth of Extinction in the sense, “by which realized'
and that which in realized ', [respectively) 18). Of them, the Path is
included in the artificial character. That which is included in the arti-
ficial character is of false, deceptive nature (mȚșāmoșadharmin) 19). That
which is of false, deceptive nature is untrue (asatya), that which is untrue
is not eternal, and that which is non-eternal cannot be a refuge. And
the Extinction realized by this Path also represents, according to the
system (naya) of Śrāvaka 20), the mere absence of Defilement and Suffering,
just like the extinction of a lamp. Also, a non-existence (abhāva) cannot
be a refuge nor a non n-refuge.
The Community' is a term for the community [of the Saints]
belonging to three Vehicles 21). And they are always possessed of fear
(sabhaya), because, as learned people, they have taken refuge in the Tathā-
gata and are seeking for deliverance 22); [but still] they have [many]
6
13) On these two categories of " dharma’, see S. p. 70 (v. 145 and comm.) T. bstan-
paại chos & rtogs-paại chos, c. FIT & DIE, resp.
14) kāya, T. tshogs, C. 4. As for these three kāyas. See Mvyut, ş 104, 95–97.
15) kola, T. gzins, c. Att. For • kolópama' Cf. Vaj. C. p. 23; MN, I, 134,135
(kullūpamo dhammo).
16) paryavasāna, T. mthar-thug-pa (paryanta). C. translation in the insti
ku G A TE catches the meaning well. (This term is for tyājya in v. 20).
17) abhisamaya, T. mňon-par rtogs-pa, C. ii.
18) See S. p. 11 (v. 10 and comm.).
19) (* moșadharma ’in v. 20). Pāli musā-mosa-dhamma.“mosa'
sified form of " musā" (deceptive). C., T. brdsun-pa slu-baủi chos-can. See BHS
Dic., PTS Dic., s. v.
20) It is remarkable in this text that whenever the subject refers to the unworthiness
of Dharma or Sangha, the author substitutes Śrāvaka for it and never refers to that of
Bodhisattva.
21) For the following passage, see ŚMS 221 a. This passage is exactly an extract
in Pāli is the inten-
from that sūtra.
It is
22) niħsarana, T. ñe-bar hbyun-ba, C. HE (= loka-niḥsarana).
synonymous with ‘moksa '.
[ 182]



The Ratnag otra vibhāga
things to be done (sakaraṇīya) and are approaching (i.e. have not yet
realized) 23) the Highest Perfect Enlightenment 24). How are they posses-
sed of fear? As the Arhais (the Saints of the Vehicle of Śrāvaka), though
having extirpated rebirth 25), have not yet destroyed the Impression [of
Defilements), there therefore exists always and constantly 26) a strong
notion of fear in all physical life 27), as if standing in face of the executioner
with raised sword 28). So they have not attained the ultimate delightful
Deliverance 22,. Indeed, [that which is] a refuge [by itself] never seeks
for refuges [in others]. Just as living beings, having no refuge, are
frightened by this or that fear, and consequently seek for the Deli-
verance, similarly even the Arhats have their fear, and, being frightened
by fear they take refuge in the Tathāgata 29).
And thus one who seeks for a refuge because of his being possessed of
fear, will inevitably seek for the deliverance from fear And as being a
seeker of deliverance, with reference to the destruction of the root of fear,
a learned man 30) is one who has things to be done' (sakaraṇīya) 31). As
being a learned man, he is ‘one who has undertaken’ (pratipannaka) to
attain the fearless, highest state 32), i.e. the Highest Perfect Enlightenment.
For this reason, the Community, being a partial refuge, cannot be the
correct.
23) pratipannaka (Pāli patipannaka maggatthaka, one who has entered upon
the Path). It is used here in the sense of “gone towards', 'entered the way ’, but
not 'attained [the Enlightenment] ’, and the emphasis is on the approach. Hence
C. ## JA EU in Bos this * = * =is quite
On the contrary, T. 'shugs-pa ma yin-no' is probably due to a misunder-
standing of this ‘pratipannaka’ for the actual attainment of Enlightenment. (For the
parallel passage in SMS, T. shugs-pa lags-so, where the negative ‘ma’ is not used).
24) Cf. SMS 221 a.
25) punarbhava, T. yan-srid-pa, c. tj (= sāsravadharma).
26) satata-samitam (BHS), T. rtag-tu rgyun mi-ịchad-par, c. .
27) sam skāra, T. ḥdu-byed, C. #ji TT .
28) The text should have Danda between“ vadakapuruṣe' and tasmāt'. For
vadakapurușa, T. gśad-maḥi skye-bu.
29) C. regards this passage (arhatām api śaraṇam upagacchati) as a quotation
from ŚMS, and before the quotation has the same commentary passage as the Skt. text
up to “pratyupasthitā bhavanti '. Cf. SMS 219 b.
30) śaikşa, T. slob-pa, C.
c.
31) On the contrary, Buddha is said to be 'aśaikşa’. (Cf. aśaikșa-sāntānika, S.
p. 39, 1. 3.)
32) ārşabha (Lit. coming from a bull, rşabha), descendant of Rşabha (name of a
former Buddha), Pāli ‘āsabha 'means a hero or great man and is an epithet of the Buddha.
T. khyu-mchog (the highest bull). C. om. “ārşabha '. 'ārşabha-sthāna' Pāli asabhatt-
hāna, the first place, leadership.
[ 183 ]



J. TAKASAKI
ultimate refuge. Thus these two Refuges, (i.e. the Doctrine and the
Community), are called “temporary refuges’ 33).
§ 3. Only the Buddha is the Refuge from the Highest Standpoint.
From the ultimate standpoint 34),
Buddhahood is the sole Refuge of the world,
Because the Sage has the body of the Doctrine,
And because in that the Community sets the ultimate goal 35). || 21 ||
As has been said before, the Sage (muni), represented as neither becom-
ing originated nor disappearing, is endowed with the body of the Doc-
trine, liberated from passions and [characterized 36)] as the Two Truths of
purification (i.e. the Truth of Path and the Truth of Extinction), and
in the purity of this Body of the Doctrine (= the Absolute Body, dhar-
makāya), the Community (of the Saints] belonging to the three Vehicles
sets the ultimate goal of acquisition 37). Therefore, from the ultimate
standpoint, that which is the imperishable Refuge, eternal Refuge, and
everlasting Refuge, which lasts as long as the utmost limit 38) in the un-
protected and refugeless world, is (only one] 39), that is to say, the Tathā-
33)
paryantakāla-śaraņa. ' paryantakāla ’ is a Bahuvrihi comp. meaning “having
kāla which has paryanta, the end'. Both T. & C., putting a negative, interpret this
term as 'nâtyantakāle śaraņe'. But it is wrong. (T. mthar-thung-paḥi dus-na skyabs
ma-yin-pa, c. ## ). A correct translation is shown in ŚMS, where
for · paryantakāla ’, T. dus-kyi mthaḥ-mchis-pași, c. BR (having limitation, limited).
(ŚMS 221 a).
About “sabhayatā' of the Śrāvakas, see v. I, 32 and comm.
34) pāramārthikam. In Skt., it is an adjective to 'buddhatva'. But T. takes it in the
adverbial sense, saying "dam-paḥi don-tu' (paramârthataḥ), which seems better to grasp
the meaning in comparison with the Empirical standpoint in v. 19. Also, see the prose
comm. on this verse. (C.
# being an adjective to buddhatva as S.).
nişthâdhigama-paryavasāna, and tannișthatva dharmakāyaviśudd-
hiniștha. See below.
36) T. inserts 'mtshan-ñid' (lakṣaṇa) after “ vyavadana-satya-dvaya'. It is help-
ful to make the meaning clear. See S. p. 11, 1. 14 (vyavadānasatyadvaya-lakṣaṇo virāga-
dharma iti). C. reads probably · śivâdvayavirāgadharma).
37) nişthâdhigama-paryavasāna, T. mthar-thug-pa thob-pas mthar phyin-par hgyur-ba,
c. # (om. adhigama).
38) aparântakoțisama, T. phyi-maḥi mthaḥi mu-dan mñam-pa, C.
:. File tha #
(as if · pūrvântakoţiniştha ’).
ekam’ should be inserted after “pāramārthikam’, being the explanation of the
termekatra' in the verse. The same with T.
36) niştha
39) 6
[ 184 ]
1



The Rat na gotravib h ā g a
gata, the Arhat, the Perfectly Enlightened one 40). And this teaching of
the unique, eternal, ever-lasting, quiescent and unchangeable Refuge is
to be understood in detail according to the Āryaśrīmālā-sūtra 41).
§ 4. The Meaning of the 3 “ Jewels '.
[They are called] “ Jewels ’, because
Their appearance is difficult to obtain,
They are immaculate and powerful,
And because of their being the ornament of the world,
And being the highest and unchangeable. // 22 //
In short, by the sixfold common nature with Jewels, these three
named Buddha, Doctrine and Community, are called “ Jewel'. That is
to say, 1) through the common nature of their appearance being difficult
to obtain 42); because those people who have not ripened 43) the root of
virtue cannot get any chance to meet them, even during a long succession
of
44). 2) Through the common nature of being immaculate; because
they are apart from all kinds of 45) dust. 3) Through the common nature
of power 46); because they are endowed with the quality of unthinkable
power, the 6 Supernatural Powers (abhijñā) 47) and so forth. 4) Through
the common nature of being the ornament of the world; because they are
the cause of beauty 48) intended by the whole world. 5) Through the
common nature of being superior to the artificial 49) jewel; because they
are supermundane. And 6) through the common nature of being un-
changeable by praise, blame etc. 50); because of their non-artificial nature.
eaons
6
as
40) pl. in the text.
41) ŚMS 221 a.
This “ekayāna ’-theory is one of its main points of teaching.
42) durlabhôtpādabhāva, T. hbyun-ba dkon-pa, C. (in v. 22,
Hi #j). For this passage, cf. BGS 808 a.
43) anavāpta, T. ma bskrun-pa, c. Ti E 1 (unable to obtain).
41) kalpa, T. bskal-pa, c. Eh.
45) I accepted T. reading “sarvâkāra' instead of sarvācāra '.
instead of sarvācāra'. C. translation is
sarva-sāsravadharma'.
46) prabhā, T. mthu, C. Et non.
47) 1) divyācakşus, 2) divyāśrotra, 3) ceta-paryāya-jñāna, 4) pūrvanivāsânusmrti-
jñāna, 5) rddhividdhi-jñāna, & 6) āsravakşaya-jñāna. Cf. Mvyut. 14.
48) śobhā, T. dge-ba, C. om.
49) prativarņika, T. bsñan-pa, C. om.
50) These are called ' asta-lokadharmāḥ, i.e. lābha, alābha (gain & loss); yaśas, ayaśas
(praise and blame); nindā (blame), prašamsā (praise); sukha, duḥkha. Cf. Mvyut. 125.
• stuti’ is for praśamsa. So, instead of stuti-ninda ', c. t .
[ 185 ]



VI. THE GERM OF THREE JEWELS IN FOUR ASPECTS
Immediately after the explanation of the Three Jewels, there is one
śloka with reference to the question, in what circumstances are there born
the Three Jewels, what is the birth-place 1) of purity, mundane and
supermundane.
(Kārikā 4)
The Reality mingled with pollution,
And [the Reality] apart from pollution,
The Immaculate Qualities of the Buddha, and his Acts;
[These are the four aspects of] the sphere
Of those who perceive the Highest Truth,
From which arise the pure Three Jewels 3). // 23 //
2)
What is elucidated by this śloka ?
The Germ of these Three Jewels
Is the sphere of the Omniscience 2),
1) yoni, T. skye-baħi gnas, C. om.
2) paramârthadarsin sarvadarśin (in v. 24) sarvajña (in comm.) C.
Mo,
, kp *,
for the respective case. (T. has literal translations). Cf. Saddharma-
puņdarika, I, v. 97, etc. (paramārthadarśin).
3) This is the stanza by which the basic subjects of this text are shown. Each
one of these four is treated in each chapter (I-IV), and also these 4 stand for the latter
4 of the 7 vajrapadas.
There is a Sūtra named “ Anuttarâśrayasūtra” (AĀS), of which now only the Chi-
nese translation is available (C. FILE E HET Taisho, No. 669). This sūtra also men-
tions the same 4 subjects with which the main part of the sūtra is formed, namely: *
(dhātu) of the Tathāgata in Chap. II, (bodhi), in Chap. III, IHI W (guna), in
Chap. IV, and (kriyā) of the Tathāgata in Chap.V. It seems that this Sūtra, though
it bears the name of 'sūtra ’, has been composed after the Ratna., probably in order to
authorize this theory of the 4 subjects. Detailed discussion of this problem is given in
my Introduction.
[ 186 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
And it is inconceivable in fourfold
For four reasons, respectively. || 24 ||
Here, 1) The Reality mingled with pollution (samalā tathatā) ’4)
is a term for the Essence (dhātu), unreleased from the sheath of defile-
ments', i.e. the Matrix of Tathāgata. 2) The Reality apart from pollu-
tion' (nirmalā tathatā) 5) is a term for the same Essence, when it is chara-
cterized as the Perfect Manifestation of Basis (āśrayaparivștti) 6) in the
Stage of Buddha, i.e. the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata. 3) Imma-
culate Qualities of the Buddha' means Supermundane Qualities of the
Buddha-10 Powers and so on-in this Absolute Body of the Tathāgata,
characterized as the Perfect Manifestation of Basis. 4) · The Buddha's
Act' means the automatic 7), highest act of these Qualities of the Buddha,
10 Powers, etc., which continues to give prophecies 8) to Bodhisattvas,
without end 9), without interruption,
without interruption, unceasingly.
unceasingly. And also, these
four subjects are inconceivable 10) for four reasons, respectively; therefore,
they are called the Sphere of Omniscience 11).
Then, for which four reasons ?
4)
samalā tathatā, T. driſ-ma-dan) bcas(-paņi) de-bshin-ñid, C.
. 真如有雜
Hi, tj hii ki, i hi ku.
5) nirmalā tathatā, T. dri-ma med-paḥi de-bshin-ñiid, c. hehe He, THE HE
KH, JIE kH.
6) T. gnas yons-su gyur-pa, C. . The term “āśraya-parivrtti" seems to have
somehow a different sense than the ‘āśrayaparāvrtti’ often used among the Vijñāna-
vādin. The difference is probably due to what is meant by ‘āśraya'. Here ‘āśraya'
signifies ‘ dhātu' or “gotra' in the sense of ' tathāgatagarbha' (see v. V, 7), while in case
of 'āśrayaparāvrtti ”, “ āśraya' signifies also dhātu' but in the sense of ‘ālayavijñāna
(see S. p. 73, comm, on the verse quoted from the Mahāyānâbhidharmasūira). And here
‘dhātu ’, being “cittaprakſti”, is regarded as the same as “ dharmakāya’, i.e. the Reality.
Only because of ‘āgantukakleśa ’ attached to it, it cannot manifest itself fully. By remov-
ing such“ klesa’, this dhātu becomes manifested fully, as being the reality itself. This
point is called “ parivítti'. On the contrary, “ alayavijñāna ’ no longer remains the same
when “āśrayapäravrtti’ takes place, and this change of basis is called 'parāvſtti'. See
my Introduction III, where the uses of these terms in the Sūtrâlankāra are discussed.
») pratisvam, T. so-so-ran-gi (of its own), c. 2 (natural).
8) vyākarana-kathā, T. lun-bstan-paḥi gtam, C. et C. The prophecy
on the attainment of the Highest Enlightenment,
) anişthita, T. med-par ma gyur-shin, C. (?) nişthita ' means being done,
ready, fixed or completed, i.e. coming to an end. So, “anisthita' means always not com-
ing to an end '.
10) Cf. AĀS 469 b (beginning of Chap. II).
11) See note VI-2.
[ 187 ]



1
J. TAKASAKI
§ 1. Inconceivability of the 4 Subjects.
Because, [the Germ is] pure but defiled (at one and the same time),
[The Absolute Body is] of no impurity, and yet purified,
[The Qualities are] of inseparable nature 12) [from the Absolute
Body), and
[The Acts are] effortless and of no discrimination. || 25 ||
Here, 1) the Reality mingled with pollution is always, at the same
time, pure and defiled; this point is inconceivable 13). [Here, inconcei-
vable’ is] in the sense that even for the Pratyekabuddhas who believe in
the way of profound Doctrine 14), this is not an understandable sphere 15).
Because it is said 16):
"O Goddess 17), these two points are quite difficult to be cognized.
It is difficult to be cognized that the mind is pure by nature. It
is also difficult to be cognized that this very mind is defiled. O God-
dess, those who can hear these two points (with understanding] are
only either yourself or Bodhisattvas who are endowed with the great
qualities. O Goddess, for the other Srāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas,
these two points are to be understood only through the faith in the
Tathāgata ” 18).
2) * The Reality apart from pollution', though it is originally not
defiled by pollution, yet it is purified afterwards; this point is inconceiv-
able. Because it is said 19):
“ The mind is clear by nature 20). This is the real knowledge as
it is 21).
Therefore it is said 22) [the Tathāgata] perfectly enligh-
12) avinirbhāgadharma, T. rnam-par dbye-ba-med chos, c. Tito EXE.
13) Cf. AĀS 470 с. (end of Chap. II). (= S. p. 21, 1l. 17–18).
14) The doctrine of relativity (pratitya-samutpāda), so C. X. C. men-
tions 'śrāvaka’ along with pratyekabuddha'. So does AĀS, too.
15) agocara-vişaya, T. spyod-yul-du ma gyur-paḥi yul, c. # .
16) ŚMS 220 c.
17) Indicating śrīmālādevī, the heroine of the Sūtra.
18) Cf. AĀS 473 c (end of Chap. III). (= S. p. 22, 1. 5).
19) DRS 20 b. (H * ... 41 P.
20) prakſti-prabhāsvaram cittam, C.
L.
tat tathaîva jñānam, T. de-ni de-kho-na bshin śes-so (tat tattvavad jñānam,
c. tp Tu * kn * kn .
22) C. , but DRS itself has this sentence saying
It seems the following saying is an old aphorism taken from some other source.
21)
[ 188 ]



1
The Rat nag otra vibhāga
tened the Supreme 23) Perfect Enlightenment by the Intellect en-
dowed with contemplation at one moment 24).
Next, 3) “Immaculate Qualities of the Buddha' are always 25) found ?
even in the stage of those ordinary people who are absolutely 26) defiled,
of no differentiation through the inseparable nature [from the Absolute
Body); this point is inconceivable 27). Because it is said 28) :
“ There is no one among the group of living beings in whose body
the Wisdom of the Tathāgata does not penetrate at all 29). Ne-
vertheless, as taking (wrong) conceptions 30), he cannot cognize
the Buddha's Wisdom [residing in himself]. By removing this
taking of conceptions, the Wisdom of Omniscience, self-born Wis-
dom, makes its appearance again unobstructedly 31). O Son of the
Buddha, suppose there would be a big painting cloth 32), of the size
equal to the Great 3-thousand thousands of Worlds. And indeed, on
this big cloth, the whole Great 3-thousand thousands of Worlds would
be described completely. The Great Earth would be described in
23) The text om.
anuttarā', but both T. & C. have it.
24) ekakşaņa-samāyukta ; 'laksana’ after “ekakşaņa' in the Text should be omitted.
So do T. & C. T. skad-cig-ma gcig dan ldan-pa, C.
u * (citta, instead of
lakṣaṇa). This is a modifier of 'prajñā’ by which the Buddha has attained. anuttarā
samyaksa mbodhi’, i.e.“ prajñā’ in which both prajñā and dhyāna are associated at one
moment.
26)
29) 6
dhātu
26) paurvâparyena, T. sňa-phyir, C. INI VA .
ekânta, T. gcig-tu, C. — 1ń).
27) Cf. AĀS 475 c (end of Chap. IV). (= S. p. 22, 11. 8–9).
28) The Avatamsakasūtra, Chap. XXXII. Tathāgatóipattisambhava-parivarta (kA
PE tempo), Taisho, IX, 623 c-624 a (No. 278). This Chap. XXXII is identical
with another independent Sūtra named Tathāgatótpattisambhavanirdeśa (c. kp 3* AL
tr. by Dharmarakṣa, Taisho, No. 291).
tathāgatajñāna’ in this Sūtra is identical with
and ‘gotra’, and
shows the origin of the tathāgatagarbha theory. See Introduction IV. Cf. buddha-
jñānântargamāt’ (v. I, 27).
30) samjñā-grāha, T. ḥdu-ses-kyi ħdsin-pa, c. 1(viparyasta).
31) asangataḥ, T. thogs-pa med-par, C. SITE THERE. “asanga’ is a modifier of [Buddha's|
jñāna, see S. p. 241, 1, 2 (asangena tathāgatajñānena). Cf. Lank. p. 157, 1. 14, 16; Gau-
dapāda-Kārikā IV, 96.
32) mahāpusta (big book), T. dar-yug (a narrow ribbonlike piece of silk stuff (Jäschke).
• dar ' & 'yug' both mean silk. The use of such silk is for painting.), C. (roll of
scripture). T. mentions the material and C. shows the form of the big book ’, according
to the manner peculiar to each country.
my
[ 189 ]



J. TAKASAKI
the exact size of the Great Earth. The 2-thousand Worlds
[would be written] in their own full size. [In the same way] the
thousands of Worlds, the Four Continents, the Great Ocean, the
Southern Continent of Jambū, the Eastern Continent of Videha,
the (Western) Continent of Godāvari, the Northern Continent of
Kuru, the Mount Sumeru, the Palace of Gods living on the earth,
that of Gods living in the Sphere of Desire, and of Gods living in
the Sphere of Form 33); all of these would be written in their own
size. And [thus] this big cloth would have the same size as the
expansion of the Great 3-thousand thousands of Worlds. Further-
more, this very big cloth would enter within one particle of an
atom 34). Just as this big cloth lies within one small particle of
an atom, in the same way, in each of all the other 35) particles of
atoms, too, there enters a big cloth of the same size. Suppose there
33) This passage describes various worlds, from larger one to smaller one, according
to the Buddhist cosmology. All the terms mentioned here are as follows:
1) trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu, T. ston-gsum-gyi ston-chen-poņi þjig-
rten-gyi khams, c. =ITHE ;
2) (mahācakravāla) (S. & C. om. but T. has it), T. khor-yug chen-po;
3) mahāprthivī, T. sa chen-po, C. om;
4) dvisāhasra-lokadhatu, T. ston-gñis-paḥi..., c. = FIT;
5) sähasra-lokadhātu, T. ston-gi hjig-rten-kyi khams, C. T ;
6) cāturdvipika, T. glin bshiķi hjig-rten-kyi khams, c. 1. KT;
7) mahāsamudra, T. rgya-mtsho chen-po, C. om;
8) jambudvipa, T. hdsam-buși glin, C. om. (but usually, IF HE HY or
JUAN):
9) pūrvavideha-dvīpa, T. śar-gyi lus ḥphags-kyi glin, C. om. (WH);
10) godāvarī–dvīpa, T. nub-kyi ba-lan spyod-kyi glin ( avara godānīya-dvīpa),
(PL 4 1 11);
'godānīya' is preferable.
11) uttarakuru-dvīpa, T. byan-gi sgra-mi sñan-gyi glin, C. om.
HELL);
12) sumeru, T. ri-rab, c. (E);
13) bhūmyavacara-devavimāna, T. sa-la spyod-paḥi lhaḥi gshal-yas-khan, C.
c. &
;
14) kāmâvacara-d., T. ḥdod-pa-na spyod-paḥi..., c. **;
15) (rūpâvacara-d..) (T. gzugs-na spyod-pași..., C. ÚTĚ.
C. has file (ārūpyâvacara-d.) after • rūpâvacara-d.', but it is not the case
here. Cf. Mvyut. 153–155.
34) paramâņu, T. rdul-phra-rab, c. The
anya, but T. ma-lus-pa (aśeșa) and om. sarva.
but retains sarva.
See below (S. 1. 13: tathāśeşebhyaḥ paramânubhyas...).
C. om.
35)
C. om.
anya
[ 190 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
should
appear one person, well learned, clever, intelligent, wise
and possessed of the skill 36) to approach there (i.e. to the big cloth).
And his divine eyes were perfectly pure and clear. With these
divine eyes he would perceive [and say]: Why does this big cloth of such
a great nature stay
37) here in such a limited small particle of an
atom! It is of no use to anybody! So he would think: Now, I
will break this particle of an atom by the force of great efforts 38)
and let this great cloth become useful for the world. Then, produ-
cing the strength of great efforts, he would break this small particle
of an atom with a subtle diamond 39) and would make that great
cloth useful for the world as was his intention. Not only for one
particle of an atom but also for [all] the remaining 40) atoms, he
would act in the same way 41).
Similarly, O Son of the Buddha, the Wisdom of the Tathāgata,
which is the immeasurable wisdom, the profitable wisdom for all
living beings 42), thoroughly 13) penetrates within the mentality 44)
of every living being. And every mental disposition of a living
being has the same size as the Buddha's Wisdom 45). Only the
ignorant, however, being bound by misconceptions 46) does neither
know nor cognize nor understand 47) nor realize the Wisdom of the
Tathāgata [within himself]. Therefore, the Tathāgata, having ob-
served the state 48) of all the living beings in all the universal re-
39) C. om.
36) mimāmsā, T. spyod-pa (= caryā, “habit '), C. om.
37) anutişthate (Atmanepada).
38) C. J Peti L (upāyena or upāya-san janayitvā). T. adds ' vajrena', which
appears in the next sentence in S.
sūksma-vajrena'.
40) The reading is preferably · tathā śeşebhyaḥ’ instead of tathâśeşethyaḥ'. But
T. reads “lus-pa med-pa mthaḥ-dag-las ’, as S.
41) C. om. the whole sentence.
42) C. instead has FILE * , FIE
I. (animittajñānam asan-
gajñānam).
43) sakalam, T. ma-tshan-ba med-par (aśeșeņa).
44) citta-santāna, T. sems-kyi rgyud, C. 4. See BHS Dic. “santāna '.
Often
alone is used in the same sense.
45) T. ...ye-śes dan ḥdra-bar tshad med-do. (sattvasantāna, being endowed with
tathāgatajñāna, is also apramāņa. C. om. this sentence.
46) samjñāgrāha, c. qui 711 EU 40, 41).
anu-V bhū.
c.
Te (not producing faith in...). C. om. the last
verb.
48) bhavana, T. gnas (= sthāna).
santāna
47)
[ 191 ]



J. TAKASAKI
gion 49) by his unobstructed Wisdom, resolves to be a teacher (and
says:] “What a pity! These living beings cannot cognize pro-
perly the Wisdom of the Tathāgata, though it penetrates them. O!
I shall try to withdraw all the obstacles made by wrong concep-
tions for the sake of these living beings through the teaching of
[8–fold] Holy Path 50), in order that they would by themselves,
by accepting the power of the Holy Path, cast off the big knot of
conceptions and would recognize the Wisdom of the Tathāgata
(within themselves], also that they would obtain equality with
the Tathāgata'. [In accordance with this declaration), they re-
move all the obstacles made by wrong conceptions through the
teaching of the Holy] Path of the Tathāgata. And when all the
obstacles created by wrong conceptions are withdrawn, then this
immeasurable Wisdom of the Tathāgata becomes useful to all the
world ”.
Now, 4) the Buddha's Acts’ proceed forth at one time, every-
where, always, without efforts, without discrimination, according to the
intention [of the living beings), according to [the faculty of] the living
beings who are to be disciplined 51) without fault 52), in conformance with
their merits 53); this point is inconceivable 54). Because it is said 55) :
56)
“ In order to enroll the living beings [in the Buddha's Doctrine]
the Acts of Tathāgata, though they are unlimited, are taught as if
50)
48) sarvadharmadhātu-sattvabhavanāni, T. chos-kyi dbyins sems-can-gyi gnas thams-
cad-la, T. regards . sarva’ as relating to bhavana. But cf “sarvadharmadhātuprasſtam
tathāgatajñānam' (Rāșțrapālapariprcchā, p. 4, 1. 12) C. om. "dharmadhātu ’.
āryeņa mārgôpadeśena' in the text. But it should be corrected into ‘ārya-
mārgôpadeśena', since ‘ārya’ modifies ‘mārga' but not ‘upadeśa '). T. ”phags-pași
lam, c. . See below (S. p. 24, 1. 5: āryamārgabalâdhānena.) (For this mārga,
T. reads jñāna, probably by mistake).
51) So in C. (DJ TEE TR ), and it makes the meaning clear
and supports the reading “yathā' in the text. Therefore, the reading is preferable ' -vai-
neyikeșu (vaineyika > vineya C. PJ 1, T. gdul-bya) instead of vainaikeşu'.
52) akşūņam, T. mtshan-ba med-cin, C. TATI. kşūņa = doşa (see BHS
Dic. ' akşūņa').
anugunam. C. (probably om. “guna ”), T. rjes-su mthun-par.
54) Cf. AĀS 476 b (end of Chap. V) where the following quotation from DRS is
utilized. (= S. p. 24, 1. 9; p. 25, 1. 3).
55) DRS 21 c.
56) I accepted C. reading 4 - JUNE (in buddhadharma)'.
53)
[ 192 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
they were somewhat limited 57), with summarized number 58).
However, o Noble Youth, that which is the true act of the
Tathāgata is immeasurable, inconceivable, uncognizable by all the
world, indescribable by letters, difficult to be acquired by others,
established 59) in all Buddhas' lands, rendered in equality with
all the Buddhas, far beyond all works of exertion 60), of no discri-
mination as being equal to the sky, of no differentiation 61)
being the act of the universal essence " 62) &c.
as
Then, after showing the example of pure, precious Vaidūlya stone 63
it is taught as follows 64).
O noble youth, in this manner 65), this Buddha's inconceivable
Act should be known as rendered in equality [with all the Buddhas),
nowhere blamable 66), related to the three divisions of time 67), and
not interrupting the lineage of the 3 Jewels 68). Residing in this
inconceivable Act of the Tathāgata, the Buddha never casts off
the sky-like nature of his body 69) and he shows himself in all the
Buddhas' lands; without casting off the indescribable nature of his
67) pramāṇataḥ, T. tshad-dan Idan-par, c. I.
58) samkṣepamātrakena. C. om.
59) adhişthita. T. gnas-pa. C. fi it shows a different reading (apratipra-
śrabdha).
60) ābhogakriyā, T. hbad-rtsol dan bya-ba, C. AT VE .
61) nirnānākāraṇam (Ms B. reading corrected by T. Chowdhury in his introductory
note to the Skt. text) is acceptable, but it is preferable to read “ ... karana’ instead of
• ...kāraņa”. See BHS Dic. " nānākaraņa’. T. tha-dad-du dbyer-med-pa, C. FILE THE
.
62) dharmadhātu-kriyā. So in T. C. E RE dharmadhātu-svabhāva).
63) See S. p. 5, l. 9 ff.
64) DRS 21 c.
Cf. AĀS. 476 b.
65) anena paryāyeņa, T. rnam-grans ḥdis, c. H itt A (by this example).
86) anavadya, T. kha-na-ma-tho-ba med-pa, c. TAJ HAS (AĀS PIE 4).
67) T. & C. agree to put one epithet more before “triratnavamsa...'. T. dus gsum
dar rjes-su hbrel-pa (tryadhvânubaddha), c. 3 (tryadhvasamam). Cf. AĀS
ITT Ethernet (prob. as T.). T. reading is here accepted.
68) triratna-vamśa, T. dkon-mchog-gsum-gyi gdun, c. EM (AĀS = HERE).
60) âkāśasvabhāvatā. c. Hereafter the reference is to the 3
actions, by deed, word and mind. C. failed to catch this point, But AĀS is apparently
correct.
[ 193 ]



J. TAKASAKI
speech, he teaches the Doctrine for the sake of living beings through
proper
word-communication; and being apart from all ob-
jects of the mind 70), still he can understand the deeds and inten-
tions of the minds 71) of all living beings.
§ 2. The Germ as Cause and Conditions of the 3 Jewels in its four Aspects.
The object to be enlightened, the Enlightenment,
The attributes of the enlightenment,
The act to instruct the enlightenment 72);
[Of these four), respectively,
One subject signifies the cause,
[The remaining] three are the conditions
For the purification of the former 73). || 26 ||
Indeed, of these four subjects, with reference to their inclusion of all
knowable objects, the first subject should be known as the object to
be enlightened’ (boddhavya) 74). The second subject, “the Enlightenment'
(bodhi) should be known in the sense that the object to be enlightened
has been awakened, therefore it is the Enlightenment. Being the portions
of enlightenment, they are called Buddha's attribute; in this sense the
third subject, “the attributes of the Enlightenment (bodhyanga)' is to be
known. Only through the attributes of Enlightenment is there instruction
for others; in this sense the fourth subject, “the act to instruct the
Enlightenment (bodhana)' is to be known 75). Thus with reference to these
T. sems
70) sarvacitkârambana, C. — UJU. Jf 2. Note C. translation of
* ārambana' by or
FX, and compare to S. p. 11, 1.2 (v. 9), where · āram-
baņa’ is translated by
Also see S. p. 110 (v. IV, 73): nirālambe (C.
FILE
WEL). See Note III-5, 39. (Cf. AAS 境界,
71) cittacaritâśayāmś ca.
2s-kyi spyod-pa
dan bsam-pa
yan, C. van U IT
(om. āśaya). Cf. AĀS. TR ft (citta-indriya-āśaya ?). Acc. to T., the
reading is preferably corrected into 'cittacaritān āśayāms ca’, otherwise 'ca’ is to be
removed as an excess.
72) Four subjects from the standpoint of Enlightenment (bodhi).
73) i.e. “the object to be enlightened '. It correspond to “gotra’ itself.
74) .bodhya’ in v. 26.
75) Of these 4, C. has confusion in its interpretation, C, translation of the first line
is as fillows: 所覺 (bodhyu) 菩提法(bodhi), 依菩提分(bodhyunga),
菩提分教化 (bodhana, the reading bodhanā is to be corrected into bodhana),
( 194 )



The Ratna gotra vibhāg a
6
signifies
four subjects, the arrangement of the Germ of the 3 Jewels in the state
of cause and conditions is to be known.
Here, of these four subjects, the first one, as being the seed of the
supermundane thing, should be understood as the cause (hetu) of origina-
tion of the 3 Jewels with reference to its (= of the Germ) purification ba-
sed
upon
each own
correct thinking. Thus one subject
the cause
How are there three conditions ? The Tathāgata, having
realized the Supreme Perfect Enlightenment, manifests the Act of Tathā-
gata of 32 features 76), being endowed with the Virtuous Qualities of the
Buddha, 10 Powers, etc. This is to be understood as the condition (pra-
tyaya) for the origination of the 3 Jewels with reference to the purification of
Germ based upon the voice of others 77). Thus “ [the remaining] three
are the condition”.
Hereafter, of these four subjects, a detailed and analytical explana-
tion will be made known in the remaining chapters.
眾生覺菩提, The last pada
·眾生覺菩提,should be taken as an
explanatory adjective to “bodhana', and be read .bodhana, by which the people attain
the enlightenment’. Nevertheless, C. applies each phrase for each subject in the prose
commentary. It is obviously wrong.
76) Cf. S. p. 6, 1. 16 (acc. to DRS).
77) parataḥ, which corresponds to ' pratyātma’ (each own) with reference to 'hetu'.
Of this correspondence, C. has no interpretation in the prose commentary, but in the
verse C. adds 2 padas showing this. However, C. again failed to catch the sense and re-
gards the former two subjects as relating to ' svârtha’, and the remaining two as parâr-
tha' (HI - FIHEFUR.
[ 195 ]



1. SAMALA TATHATA
VII. THE SERMON: ALL LIVING BEINGS ARE POSSESSED
OF THE MATRIX OF THE TATHAGATA.
Now, with reference to the Reality mingled with pollution', it is
said: All living beings are possessed of the Matrix of the Tathāgata 1).
By which meaning is it said thus 2)?
1) This formula shows a principle common to a group of Sūtras and śāstras which
express the tathāgatagarbha theory. The first appearance of this formula seems to be in
the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra on which the Ratna. mainly depends. The Sūtra, of which the
Skt. text is missing now, is retained in both T. & C.: T. Kg Mdo XXII, Tohoku No. 258,
C. Taisho, No. 666 •* tip *
tr. by Buddhabhadra between
408-429 A. D. and No. 667 '* ti ko * e. tr. by Amoghavajra in the
8th cent. A. D. Hereafter C. No. 666 will be used for the reference with the abbrevi-
ation, TGS.
This formula runs in C. as follows:
一切眾生雖在諸趣煩惱身中有如來藏常無染污
han I go # FEW (TGS, 457 c).
Prior to this sentence, the Sūtra says:
# DIMAR, NU — UJJE,
BET I, tj kn
來智,如來眼,如來身,結加跌坐儼然不動, (ibid.).
(With Buddha's eyes, I observe that all living beings, though they are among the
defilements of hatred, anger and ignorance, have the Buddha's Wisdom, Buddha's eye,
Buddha's body sitting firmly in the meditating form).
This shows the reason for the statement mentioned above, i.e. sarvasattvās tathā-
gatagarbhāḥ’ and as this idea of the penetration of buddhajñāna is expressed in the Ava-
tamsakasūtra (Tathāgatôtpattisambhava-pariv, see Note VI-28, 29, and my Introduction),
it is clear that TGS borrowed this idea from that Sūtra and established the above formula.
After the first sentence, the Sūtra furthermore says:
諸佛佛法蘭若佛出世 若不出世 一切眾生如來之藏
! 7 th (ibid.).
(esā -- dharmāņām dharmatā, utpādād vā tathāgatānām anutpādād vā sadaivaite sattvās
tathāgatagarbhāḥ) (quoted in S. p. 73).
This third one shows that the formula is the eternal truth, and by combi-
Note 2 on foll. p.
[ 196 ]



The Ratnagotravib häg a
(Kārikā 5)
The multidudes 3) of living beings are included
in the Buddha's Wisdom 4),
Their immaculateness is non-dual by nature,
Its result 5) manifests itself on the Germ of the Buddha 6),
Therefore, it is said: all living beings 7)
are possessed of the Matrix of the Buddha. || 27 ||
(What is shown by this sloka ?8)
The Buddha's Body penetrates everywhere,
Reality is of undifferentiated nature,
And the Germ [of the Buddha] exists [in the living beings].
Therefore, all living beings are
always possessed of the Matrix of the Buddha. || 28 ||
3
up to
ning these three sentences together, we can get the main doctrine of the sūtra.
Here in the Ratna., the main purpose of the teaching is to emphasize this point and,
basing himself upon the TGS, the author analysed and systematized the tathāgatagarbha
theory. First of all, the author picked up the fundamental characteristics of tathāga-
tagarbha in the 3 meanings, he next explained its features and functions summarized
in 10 points, and lastly, the 9 illustrations in order to show how living beings are cover-
ed with defilements.
2) The order of the text differs among S., T. & C. S. keeps quite a regular order start-
ing with the Kārikā (v. 27), but omits the usual heading before the next commentary
verse (v. 28). T. has clearly confusions in the prose commentary as J suggested. About
C., on the contrary, starting with the commentary verse (v. 28) like T., it puts v. 27 after
tathāgatagarbhasūtrânusāreņa nirdeso bhavisyati' with the heading: as said in the Kārikā
text (kp Toe). As regard this point, it looks all right and it is imaginable that the
text used for C. translation had this order, i.e. v. 27 was put after the explanation.
But from “ pūrvataram tu' ' uddānam’ is missing in C. and v. 28 is followed by
v. 29 with no heading.
3) rāśi, T. tshogs, c. .
4) buddhajñānântargamāt sattvarāśeh' means grammatically that sattva-rāśi goes
into buddhajñāna. But T. as translation, c. Ti le being not separated
from Buddha's Wisdom). This idea is shown in the Avatamsaka quoted in S. p. 22.
(see above, Note VII-1).
5) The result of immaculateness i.e. buddhatā, dharmakāya, etc. or of sattvarāśi.
Is C. Ef identified with it?
6) bauddhe gotre tatphalasyôpacārāt. For upacāra, T. ñer-brtags. (In the sense of
* carati ', resides). C. translation of this line is as follows: ft — UJJ OF
Æ, (because of the body of real nature, equal to all the Buddhas). It is
difficult to identify it with the present Skt, reading.
sarve dehinaḥ sarvasattvāḥ (sarva] śarīriņaḥ (in the following verse).
8) Inserted according to the conformity. (anena kim darśitam ).
come
[ 197 ]



J. TAKASAKI
In short, by three kinds of meaning, it is said by the Lord that all
living beings are always possessed of the Matrix of Tathāgata. That
is to say, by the following three meanings: 1) the Absolute Body (dharma-
kāya) of the Tathāgata penetrates all living beings; 2) the Tathāgata
being the Reality (tathātā), is the undifferentiated whole; and 3) there
exists the Germ of the Tathāgata (tathāgatagotra) [in every living being] °).
And of these three subjects 10), the [detailed) explanation will be made
below 11)
according to the Tathāgatagarbha-sūtra. Prior to it, however,
there is (another] meaning by which this meaning in all its aspects is in-
dicated in the Scripture 12) with no variance anywhere 13). With refe-
rence to that as well, I shall now explain.
9) 1) (sarvasattveșu) tathāgata-dharmakāya-parispharaņârtha, T. de-bshin-gśegs-
paủi chos-kyi skus ìpho-baḥi don;
2) tathāgata-tathatā–’vyatirekârtha, T. de-bshin gśegs-paḥi de-bshin-ñid rnam-
par dbyer med-paḥi don;
3) tathāgata-gotra-sambhavârtha, T. de-bshin-gśegs-paủi rigs yod-paḥi don.
C. has no equivalent word for each subject. The term “sambhava’ would mean
both being' and “becoming '. T. 'yod-pa’ shows the first sense, but it seems to be
not enough to express the idea contained here, in comparison with the phrase: ‘gotre...
upacārāt ’ in v. 27. That is to say, the sense “ origination' or ' manifestation ’ is to be
implied here. These three are the fundamental characteristics of tathāgatagarbha, as well
as the ground of the statement: sarvasattvās tathāgatagarbhāḥ. Equality through dhar-
makāya, tathatā and tathāgatagotra is also a point of emphasis in the text. These are called
* trividha-svabhāva’ of tathāgatadhātu (S. p. 69, 1. 17). Cf. BGŚ 808 a, XE $, kp pp,
DE PE, respectively. The threefold meaning of the term tathāgatagarbha mentioned
below (S. p. 70, 1. 16–18; p. 71, 1. 10-12; p. 72, 1. 7–9) as well as in BGŚ (795 c-ff.) is also
an implication of this same idea.
Three terms in BGŚ are as follows:
1) FT HELE:
: tathāgata, as garbha in which sattvas are `enveloped ’;
2) B: garbha in which tathāgata is “hidden ';
3) E
: sattvas possessed of garbha of tathāgata, i.e. of garbha ' enve-
loping' tathāgata.
The first one shows the all-pervadingness of ' dharmakāya 'the 2nd should be applied
samalā tathatā in the sense sarvakleśakośôpagūờho dharmakāyaḥ', and the 3rd
shows the existence of ‘gotra' among sattvas. See Note X-139 140 150 151 169 170.
10) arthapada, T. don-kyi gnas, c. m .
11) See S. pp. 69–73.
12) pravacana. This sentence is missing in C. T. reads this word as the subject
(gsun-rab) See below.
13) aviſeșeņa. Significance of this sentence is as follows:
The 3 meanings mentioned above are applicable exclusively to Tathāgatagarbha;
on the other hand, the following meanings, beginning with svabhāva, are applicable to
any subject (sarvatrâviſeșena) and are already used in the scripture. See Appendix III.
to
( 198 )



VIII. ANALYSIS OF THE GERM FROM 10 POINTS OF VIEW
Summary 1):
The own nature and the cause,
The result, function, union and manifestation,
Various states and all-pervadingness,
The qualities always unchangeable and non-differentiation;
In these [points of view), there should be known
The implication 2) of the Absolute Essence 3). || 29 ||
In short, with reference to 4) these 10 meanings, there should be un-
derstood the various aspects 5) of the Essence of the Tathāgata, which is
the sphere of the highest true knowledge 6). What are the 10 meanings ?
They are namely: 1) the own nature (svabhāva) [of the Germ); 2) the
cause (hetu); 3) the result (phala) [of its purification); 4) the function
(karman) [towards the purification); 5) the union (yoga) [of the Germ];
6) the manifestation (vſtti) [of the Germ]; 7) the various states (avasthāpra-
bheda) [of its manifestation]; 8) all-pervadingness (sarvatraga)” [of the
Germ]; 9) unchangeability (avikāra) [of the Germ through various states);
and 10) non-differentiation (abheda) [of the Germ with the Reality] 8).
1) uddāna, T. sdom, C. H . This verse on the 10 meanings (v. 29) has a doubtful
position as the original Kārikā, though it is mentioned in the Kārikā text of C. Because
it follows immediately upon the word 'vaksyāmi’ in the last sentence, it seems that
this uddāna was composed by the commentator prior to explaining following Kārikās.
Therefore, I ventured to omit this verse from the line of Kārikās.
2) arthasamdhi, T. dgons-don (implied meaning), C. 妙義次第 (succeeding
order of the excellent meanings).
3) paramârtha-dhātu, T. don-dam-dbyins, c. - PE (dhātu in the sense
of tathāgatadhātu, i.e. gotra).
4) abhisamdhāya, c. # ....
5) vyavasthā, T. rnam-par gshag-pa, C. S.
paramatattva jñānavişayas tathāgatadhātuḥ. An explanation of the term para-
mârthadhātu in the verse. C. rendering of tathāgatadhātu here is RE:
sarvagatva in the verse.
8) Corresponding terms for these 10 in T. & C. are as follows:
1) ro-bo, 19; 2) rgyu, ]; 3) ḥbras[-bu], #; 4) las, X; 5) Idan-pa,
6)
[ 199 ]



J. TAKASAKI
(I) SVABHAVA & (II) HETU 9)
6
cause
Now, with reference to the meaning of 'own nature and
there is one śloka.
(Kārikā 6)
[The Matrix of the Tathāgata) is always undefiled by nature 10),
Like the pure jewel, the sky and water;
It follows after 11) the faith in the Doctrine,
The highest Intellect, Meditation and Compassion 12). // 30 //
§ 1. The Nature of the Essence of the Tathāgata.
Here, what is shown by the former half of this śloka ?
Because of its own nature of power,
Identity, and being moist; in these [three points]
[The Essence of the Tathāgata has] a resemblance 13)
To the quality of the wish-fulfilling jewel, the sky and water.
|| 31 ||
5)
# ; 6) hjug-pa, 1T; 7) gnas-skabs-kyi rab-tu dbye-ba, 5) (kāla-pra-
bheda), 8) kun-tu hgro-ba, - t ; 9) mi-hgyur-ba, Tren; dbyer-med-pa,
TES.
Cf. BGś 796 b: 1) É ! ; 2) *; 3) ; ; 4) # ; 總
U ; 6) 5 #; 7) BE L.) ; 8) i ! ; 9) FILE *1; 10) PIHE
S t], of these 10 categories, the first 6 are common to the 8 categories on
• nirmalā tathatā' (Chap. II), and the application of the same 6, from svabhāva to vịtti,
is also observed in YBh. (Taisho, XXX, 36 a), MSA, IX, 56–59, comm., etc. Also the
Mahāyānadharmadhātvavićeşa–Šāstra (DAś) mentions 12 categories with respect to 'bo-
dhicitta' (DAŚ 892 a), namely: 1) R; 2) W]; 3) ; 4) 3; 5) TE ŽU);
6) L.; 7) ; 8) "; 9) to ; 10) TPE FU; 11) PE
# FI; 12) — 4. See Appendix III.
•) Cf. BGŚ 796 6 (I. svabhāva & II hetu), DAŚ 892 a (3. p, 2. l).
prakſty-asamklişța. For prakſti, T. rar-bshin, C. RE. The subject term
for this and the following Kārikās is ‘jinagarbha’ in v. 45.
-anvaya, T. ...las byun-ba (come out from...), C. om.
12) dharmâdhimukti, adhiprajñā, samādhi, karuņā, respectively, which show the
cause of purification.
18) sādharmya, T. chos mthun-pa-ñid, c. W LUT
.
10)
11)
See below.
[ 200 ]



The Rat nag otra vibhāg a
• In these’ three [points), which are already mentioned above 14)
the resemblance of the Essence of the Tathāgata to the purified quality
of the wish-fulfilling jewel, the sky and water, respectively, should be
known with reference to its particular and common characteristics. Now,
first of all, a resemblance to the wish-fulfilling jewel is to be known
of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, with reference to its particular
characteristic, the own nature of powers (prabhāva), fulfillment 15) of desired
objects 16) etc. A resemblance to the sky is to be known of the Reality,
with reference to its own nature of identity (everywhere] (ananyathābhāva) as
the particular characteristic. A resemblance to water is to be known 17) of
the Germ of the Tathāgata, with reference to its moist nature (snigdhabhāva)
of mercy towards living beings as the particular characteristic. And
now, of all these, with reference to their being undefiled always, absolutely,
by nature, i.e., the innate purity as the common characteristic, this very
resemblance [of the Essence] to the purified qualities of wish-fulfilling
jewel, the sky and water is to be understood.
§ 2. Obstructions and Causes of Purification 18).
Now, what is shown by the latter half of the śloka (v. 30) ?
There are four kinds of Obstructions 19):
Enmity 20) to the Doctrine and perception of the Self,
14)
vv. 27, 28 and its commentary. i.e. trividhasvabhāva of tathāgatadhātu.
16) samýddhi, T. grub-pa (= siddhi), c. I. (as T.).
16) cintitârtha, T. bsam-pași don, C. Fr (C. IT DLE, after he is
probably a misreading of prabhā for bhāvanā). C. has a lacuna after samrddhi up to the
end of the commentary on v. 31, but it puts (cintā iti)" before · tathāga-
tadharmakāye' and it seems to correspond to
• TE W., in v. 31 of C., but not
found in S.
17) For these 3 terms showing the similarity in particular characteristics, T., C.
& BGŚ (796 b) runs as follows:
1) T. mthuậi no-bo-ñid, c. # JI, BGś kp IH PRE;
2) T. gshan-du ma-yin-pa-ñid-kyi ran-gi ro-bo, C. T , BGś THERE;
3) T. brlan-paủi ran-gi no-bo, C. #K, BGś L .
18) Cf. BGś 797 a.
19) ăvaraņa, T. sgrib, c. Ba Tro.
20) pratigha, T. khon-khro (hatred, wrath, enmity), c. (abuse).
[ 201 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Fear of Suffering in this world,
And indifference to the profit of living beings 21); - || 32 ||
[These are respectively) of the Icchantikas 22),
Of the Heretics 23), the Śrāvakas and the Pratyekabuddhas 24); –
The virtues, the faith in the Doctrine] etc., are
The four Causes of purification. // 33 ||
In brief there are those three kinds of living beings among their mul-
titudes 25): 1) those who cling to the worldly life (bhavâbhilāșin), 2) those
who seek for deliverance from it (vibhavâbhilāșin), 3) those who wish nei-
ther of both (tadubhayānabhilāșin) 26). Of them, 1) those who cling to
the worldly life’ should be known as twofold. a) The people whose
intention is against the path to Emancipation and who never belong to
the family of the perfect Nirvāṇa (aparinirvāṇagotraka) 27), Those are
only seeking for Phenomenal Life and not for Nirvāņa. And b) Those
people who, although belonging to this Our Religion (ihadhārmika) 28),
have definitely fallen into the former's way 29). Some of these are
hostile to the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle. With reference to them,
21) The reading should be 'sattvärtha-nirapekșatā' (or -arthe nirape-) instead of
' -artham nirapekṣatā' in the text. T. sems-can don-la ltos med-pa.
22) icchantika, T. ḥdod-chen, C.
VN) (of this literal meaning, BHS
Dic. S. v.). As a Buddhist technical term, it means one who longs only for worldly plea-
sure (= bhavâbhilāșin, see below), more strictly, one who abuses the Buddhist doctrine,
esp. that of Mahāyāna. The capacity for Enlightenment of this Icchantika is usually
denied as being 'aparinirvāṇagotraka'. But from the viewpoint of the tathāgatagarbha
theory, the Icchantika is said to be able to get Enlightenment as taught in this text
(S. p. 37, 1. 1 ff.).
23) tirthya, T. mu-stegs, C. blid (= anyatîrthika) tërthika.
24) svayambhū in the text (T. ran-byun, C. . CF. AA II, 6.
25) Cf. AĀS 471 a; BGŚ 797 b ff.
26) Of these 3, 1) T. srid-pa ḥdod-pa, C. * * ; 2) T. srid-pa-dań bral-bar ḥdod-pa,
C. ER #1 ; 3) T. de-gñis-ka mnon-par mi-ḥdod-pa, c.T-, res-
pectively.
21) T. yoňs-su mya-ran-las mi-hdaḥ-baủi rigs-can, C. THERE. This sen-
tence and the next show the definition of Icchantika.
28) T. chos hdi-pa-ħid, c. All (within the Buddhist fold). The word
• iha’here means 'in this religion ' but not ' in this world'. Cf. Pāli idha, which is used
in this sense in Vibhanga 245 (PTS Dic. s. v.).
29) i.e. samsāram eva icchanti na nirvāṇam ', c. TA
ON
(as same as Icchantika in their position).
[ 202 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
the Lord said as follows 30) :
“I am not their teacher; they are not my pupils. 0 Sāriputra, I
say of them that they are chiefly filled with darkness, as migrat-
ing from darkness to another darkness, from gloom to greater
gloom 31).
32)
Next, 2) those who seek for deliverance from this worldly life’ are
also twofold. a) Those who have fallen into a methodless way (anupāya-
patita) and b) “those who are in [the correct] method' (upāyapatita)
Here, ' those who are of no method' are again divided into three 33)
i) Outsiders of this Religion (itobāhya) 34), i.e. various kinds of Heretics
(anyatīrthya), i.e. the Carakas 35), the Parivrājakas 36), the Jains 37), etc.
ii) & iii) Insiders of Our Religion, but whose conduct is in common with
the Heretics 38). They, though being faithful in [Buddhism), take hold
of bad conceptions 39). Then, what are they? They are namely, ii) those
who have the perception of the substantial Ego (pudgaladſsti) 40) and
have no faith in the Highest Truth. With reference to them, the
Lord said 41):
“ One who has no faith in Non-substantiality is not different from
the Heretics”.
31)
tamasas tamo
2) T.
30) AAN 467 c. Cf. AĀS 471 a. C. (and AAN as well) ‘I will call them icchantikas',
instead of “tamobhūyiṣthā ’.
ntaram andhakālān mahândhakālagāminaḥ, C. PEMIM,
WE EIE. But T. mun-pa-las kyan ches, mun-pa chen-por hgro-ba.
32) Of these 2, 1) T. thabs ma-yin-pa-la shugs-pa, C. FILE * ji ti ;
thabs-la shugs-pa, C.
C. * ji ti , respectively.
33) C. 'two ', combining the latter two in S. & T. into one. So do AĀS. & BGś.
as well. This seems to be the original reading.
34) In contrast with 'ihadhārmika’. The word “ itobāhya' is literally an adjective
to “tirthya'. T. ḥdi-las phyi-rol-tu gyur-pa, C. om.
35) caraka (lit. wanderer), T. tsa-ra-ka, C. regards them as the Sāmkhya (1 E).
36) (lit, religious wanderer), T. kun-tu rgyu (one who goes everywhere), C. regards
them as the Vaiſeșika (iT t Biji).
37) nirgranthi-putra, T. gcer-bu-ba (naked people), C. E E BE F.
38) C. 10 X b TT.
30) durgrhitagrāhin, T. dkah-baħi lta-ba hdsin-pa (durdſstigrāhin), c. juni 110 x
(viparyāsagrāhin). T. reading is accepted in this translation.
40) C. mentions Vātsīputriyas (
475) as an example.
41) The source is unknown.
[ 203 ]



J. TAKASAKI
:
con
iii) Those who have the conception of the Non-substantiality and are
proud of it are doubtless at the door of Emancipation through the Non-
substantiality 42) in this religion 43). But as they are intoxicated with
this Non-substantiality, it follows for them that Non-substantiality itself
becomes a [wrong] conception 44). With reference to these, he (=the
Lord) said in the Scripture) 45) :
“0 Kāśyapa, really even such a Inception which maintains
substantial Ego as much as Mt. Sumeru is better than the
conception of Non-substantiality on the part of those who are
proud of it".
Here, b) 'those who are in [the correct] method' are again twofold.
i) Those who belong to the Vehicle of the Śrāvaka and ii) those who belong
to the Vehicle of the Pratyekabuddha. [Both of them] have proceeded
on the fixed way of rightfulness 46).
And next, 3) “those who wish neither of both the worldly life and
deliverance from it' are the people who are standing firmly amidst the
Great Vehicle and are of the highest, talented faculty. They are not
seeking for the Phenomenal Life as the Icchantikas do, nor are they those
who are in no method like Heretics, nor those who are in the correct me-
thod [for deliverance] like Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas, but, having
entered 47) the Path to obtain 48) [the intuition of] the equality of this
Phenomenal Life with Nirvāṇa, they intend not to stay fixedly in the
Nirvāņa (apratisthitanirvāṇa) 49); their activities 50) are based upon Phe-
nomenal Life 51) but without being defiled by it, and their root is perfectly
42) tad-vimokşamukhe. c. A 19.
43) iha. The same use as in “ihadhārmika'.
14) C. #TME THE TE.
45) C. RT (Ratnakūļasūtre). This is a passage in Kāśyapa-parivarta
of the Ratnakūțasūtra. (Taisho, XI, p. 634 a). Cf. AĀS 471 b; BGŚ 797 b (quotation
from AAS); Lank. p. 146, 11-13.
46) samyaktva-niyāma, T. yan-dag-par nes-pa-ñid. C. om. the whole compound.
47) pratipanna, T. shugs-pa (to enter), see Note V-23.
48) āpatti in the text, but T. thob-pa, (C. offers no help). As by Ji's suggestion,
āpti had better be accepted. (Cf. S. p. 29 l. 4 samatâpti-mārga-pratipannāḥ).
49) T. mi–gnas-paḥi mya-nan-las-ḥdas-pa (T. adds brten-pa (āśrita) after nir-
vāna), c. TĚ THE ED). This is the highest and ideal feature
of nirvāṇa in the Mahāyāna doctrine. See S. p. 35, 1. 2 ff.
50) prayoga, T. sbyor-ba-can, C. LETT.
51) samsåragata, c. t u 11. For ·-gata ', T. brten-pa(= äśrita).
[ 204 ]



The Rat na gotra vibhāga
pure as being grounded in the firm Compassion and Superior Intention 52).
And here 53), 1) those people who cling to this wordly life, i.e. the
Icchantikas and 54) those who, though belonging to this Our Religion,
have definitely fallen into the former's way are called (A) the group of
people who conform in the wrong way (mithyātvaniyataḥ sattvarāśih).
2-a) Those people who seek for deliverance from the worldly life but have
no method' are called (B) the group of people unconformed (aniyațaḥ s.).
2-6) Those people who seek for deliverance with the correct method'
and 3) those who wish neither of both and have entered the path through
which [the intuition of] the equality [of the Phenomenal Life with the
Nirvāṇa) is attained are called (C) the group of people who conform in the
right way (samyaktvaniyataḥ s.).
Of 55) these [groups of living beings], keeping aside those people who
stand firmly in the Great Vehicle and follow the unobstructed way 56),
other people are [fourfold] 57), i.e. the Icchantikas, the Heretics, the Śrā-
vakas and the Pratyekabuddhas. Of these [four groups], there are four
kinds of Obstructions on account of which they cannot understand or
realize the Essence of the Tathāgata. What are then the four Obstruc-
tions ? That is to say, 1) the enmity 58) to the Doctrine of the Great Ve-
hicle (mahāyānadharmapratigha). This is the Obstruction of the Icchanti-
kas, and its Antidote 59) is the practice of the faith in the Doctrine of the
Great Vehicle (mahāyānadharmâdhimukti-bhāvanā) by the Bodhisattvas.
2) The conception of the Self (ātmadarśana) on the separate elements
(dharmeșu). This is the Obstruction of the Heretics, and its Antidote is
the practice of Supremacy in the transcendental Intellect (prajñāpāramita-
bh.) by the Bodhisattvas. 3) The notion of Suffering (duḥkha-samjñā)
[or rather) the fear of Suffering (duḥkha-bhirutva) in Phenomenal Life.
54) 6
ca
62) adhyāśaya, T. lhag-paḥi bsam-pa, c. 7 L. (the intention to attain Nirvāṇa).
63) Hereafter, reference is made to the relation between the 3 kinds of people above
mentioned and the 3 groups of people.
ca’ should be inserted before “ihadhārmikā ’, though it is missing in S. & T.
C. has it.
55) Hereafter, reference is made to the 4 kinds of people and their impediments.
56) anāvaraņa-gāmin (one who goes without any obstacle). But T. sgrib-pa med-pa
rtogs-pa (one who knows the unobstructed thing) and C. 求於無障礙道
(one who seeks for the unobstructed way). Here 'anāvarana ' indicates strictly Nirvāņa.
I preferred C. translation.
57) S. om. ' caturvidha’, but both T. & C. have it.
58) T. snar-ba, C. Cf. BGS MET
59) pratipakşa, T. gñen-po, c. 1o.
[ 205 ]



J. TAKASAKI
This is the Obstruction of those who belong to the Vehicle of the Śrāvaka
and its Antidote is the practice of Meditations (samādhi-bh.), Gaganaga-
ñjā 60) etc., by the Bodhisattvas. 4) Aversion to the profit of living beings
(sattvārtha-vimukhatā) or Indifference to the profit of living beings (sattva-
artha-nirapekṣatā). This is the Obstruction of those who belong to the
Vehicle of the Pratyekabuddha and its Antidote is the practice of Great
Compassion (mahākaruņā-bh.) by the Boddhisattvas 61).
These are the four kinds of Obstructions of the four kinds of living
beings. And having practised the four kinds of Antidotes to these Obst-
ructions, i.e. the faith [in the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle] etc., the Bo-
dhisattvas attain the highest purity, the highest truth, i.e. the Absolute
Body. And, accompanied by these four causes of origination of purity,
they become the sons of the Religious King in the Buddha's family. How
are they? It is said 62) :
60) T. nam-mkhah-mdsod, C. (ākāśagarbha). C. adds sūrangama'
( )
as a name of samādhi.
61) The terms for the 4 obstructions in T. & C. are as follows:
1) [thegs-pa chen-poļi] chos-la sňan-ba, X;
2) bdag-tu lta-ba, Hle;
3) ḥkhor-ba-la sdug-bsñal hjigs-pa, ti a tutti
4) sems-can-gyi don-la mi-ltos-pa, Bette
And the terms for the 4 causes of purification.
1) [thegs-pa chen-pohi] chos-la mos-pa,
TE;
2) ses-rab [-kyi pha-rol-tu phyin-pa], ;
tin-ne-ḥdsin,
ok;
4) sñin-rje chen-po,
62) The following verse is probably a quotation from some canonical work. At
least, the idea must be borrowed from an old source. The same idea is expressed with
slight difference in the following Šāstras; each of them, however, regards it as its own.
3)
1) MSA IV, 11:
dharmâdhimuktibījāt pāramitāśreșthamātſto jātaḥ
dhyānamaye sukhagarbhe karuņā samvardhikā dhātrī
C. has no corresponding verse, but in the commentary there is a passage saying:
FF, the FFH = U,
羅蜜為生母故,三胎藏勝,大禪定業為胎藏故,
PU FLE , * * en FL fit # (Taisho, XXXI, p. 596 b).
[ 206 ]



The Rat na gotra vibhāg a
Those whose seed is the faith in the highest Vehicle,
Whose mother is the transcendental Intellect 63).
On account of the origination of Buddha's Doctrine;
Whose abiding womb is the blissful meditation
And whose nurse is called Mercy;
They are the sons, the after-comers 64) of the Buddhas. || 34 ||
(III) PHALA & (IV) KARMAN
Now, with reference to the meaning of 'result' and ' function ’, there
is one śloka.
(Kārikā 7)
The Supreme Virtues 65) of Purity, Unity 66), Bliss and Eternity; -
[These] are its results [of the purification) 67);
[Towards this purification) it has the functions,
Aversion to Suffering, longing for and praying for
the acquisition of Quiescence 68). // 35 //
2) BGŚ 798 a:
U kn 4, - piit, Et ili ko
Hou ja, PC B BH FL Rif (hetu is like pitỊ, pratyaya like mātı, āśraya like
garbha, and siddhi like dhātrī).
3) DAố v. 3: TE G H ft # ## 3 H B= B C 6 HC
XFL*. Cf. C. translation of the Ratna.: * E T F
以為母 禪胎大悲乳諸佛如實子,
63) prajñāpāramitā is often called buddhamātſka' in the Prajñāpāramitāsūtra.
64) anujāta, T. rjes[-su] skyes, C. kp T F (together with • putra ').
guņa-pāramitā, T. yon-tan pha-rol[-tu] phyin-pa, C. ## she
66) ātman, T. bdag, C. He = paramâtman. Here 'ātman' should be understood
in the sense of dharmakāya' or ' dharmadhātu ’ as the universal essence or truth itself,
which represents, in its turn, the Non-substantiality (nairātmya) of separate elements
and individuals.
67) As being in the series of Kārikās, v. 35 a b had better be read as guņa-
pāramitā-phalaḥ' (Bahuvrihi comp.), whose subject or viſisya is ‘jinagarbha ' in v. 45.
68) sama-prāpti, T. shi thob-pa, c. 2** (= nirvāṇa) and om. prāpti.
65)
.
[ 207 ]



J. TAKASAKI
§ 1. The Four Supreme Virtues as the Result of Purification 69).
73)
Here, what is shown by the former half of this śloka ?
Because of the change of value 70) in the Absolute Body,
The results of these [4 causes) are, in short,
[The Purity, etc.] represented as the Antidote 71)
To the four kinds of delusion 72). || 36 ||
Those terms, the faith' etc., have been taught as the causes of
purification of the Essence of the Tathāgata. Of these [four causes] ',
in brief, the four kinds of Supreme Virtues (guņapāramitā) of the Absolute
Body of the Tathāgata are to be understood as the results' on account of
their being Antidotes to the opposites of four kinds of delusion, respecti-
vely. Now, there is a notion of being eternal (nitya), blissful (sukha), of
substantial Ego (ātman), of being pure (śubha) regarding the separate
things consisting of form and others 74) which are really non-eternal, full
of sufferings, of no substantial Ego and impure, respectively. Such a no-
tion is called the fourfold delusion' (viparyāsa). Being opposite to this
notion, there should be known 'the fourfold non-delusion (aviparyāsa) 75).
Which four ? That is to say, the notion of being non-eternal, full of suffe-
rings, of no substantial Ego, and impure regarding just those separate
69) Cf. BGŚ 798 a, AĀS 471 c.
70) viparyaya, T. bzlog-pa, C. Ell (lit. reversed). This word does not include the
sense of 'wrong' or ' mistake '. On the other hand, 'viparyasta' or 'viparyāsa 'is always
used in a bad sense. See below.
11) prati pakşa, T. gñen-po (antidote to poison), C. (TE TT] #TVO
72) viparyāsa, T. phyin-ci-log (anything wrong, deceptive), C. El 1). The
context of this verse is not so clear. According to the prose commentary, these 4 pāra-
mitās should be the antidotes to “viparyāsa-viparyaya', i.e. aviparyāsa. In this sense,
by the reading 'caturvidha-aviparyāsa ’, instead of 'caturvidha-viparyāsa’, it will be easier
to catch the meaning, though it has no support in T. & C. Or otherwise, this caturvidha-
viparyāsa’ should be taken as including two kinds of “4-fold delusion'. T. translation
shows the following meaning: These results are, in short, shown as pratipakṣa of vipa-
ryaya of the 4-fold viparyāsa in dharmakāya.
C. picks up three phrases, viz. caturvidha-viparyāsa, dharmakāye viparyayaḥ (instead
of viparyayāt), and pratipakşaprabhāvita, as being correspondent to ' viparyāsa ’, “vipary-
āsa-viparyaya' and `guņapāramitā ’, respectively.
73) The insertion of “uktāḥ' after việuddhihetu, indicated by T. Chowdhury, is
supported by T. as well as C. (T. bśad-paủi, C. ) .
74) rūpâdike vastuni. c. MA E T. as C. (= rūpâdi-vastuni
anitye).
phyin-ci ma log-pa, C. #u.
75) T.
[ 208 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
things of form, etc. Such a notion is called the fourfold Opposite of delu-
sion (viparyāsaviparyaya) 76). And again, this very [notion of non-delu-
sion) is implied as delusion' with reference to the Absolute Body of the
Tathāgata whose characteristics are eternal, etc. Being the Antidote of
this notion, there is established the fourfold Supreme Virtue of the Abso-
lute Body of the Tathāgata. That is to say, the Supreme Eternity (nitya-
pāramitā), the Supreme Bliss (sukha-pāramitā), the Supreme Unity (āt-
ma-p.), and the Supreme Purity (subha-p.) 77).
And this subject 78) is to be known in detail according to the Scrip-
ture 79). [It runs as follows]:
“ O Lord, the people have a miscomprehension regarding the phe-
nomenal things consisting of five personality aggregates which cling
to existence 80). They have a notion of eternity on the non-eter-
nal things, a notion of bliss regarding painful things, of substantial
Ego regarding non-substantial things, and have a notion of purity
regarding impure things. Even all the Srāvakas and Pratyeka-
buddhas, O Lord, also have a miscomprehension in regard to the
Absolute Body of the Tathāgata which is the sphere of the Wisdom
of Omniscience and has never been seen before 81) just because of
their knowledge of Non-substantiality 82). O Lord, if there would
be the people who have the notion of Eternity, Unity, Bliss, and
Purity [regarding the Absolute Body], they would be the legal 83)
76) C. IT WA (the reading
Tis before in Ell in the Taisho edition,
should be removed).
77) These 4 pāramitās are taught in ŚMS, MPS, etc. and are peculiar to the garbha
theory. The first appearance of this theory is probably in ŚMS.
78) grantha, T. bshun, C. om.
78) SMS 222 a.
80) upātteșu pañcasûpādāna-skandheșu. For upātta (Pāli upāta), T. zin-pa (finished,
raised). O gives the translation: as far as manifesting themselves in an individual. The
meaning is ' skandha in the form of individual or phenomenal things and not in the form
of each separate element’. Usually when 'pañca-upādānaskandha’ is spoken of, this
sense is implied. So C. merely • Ti. Bet
81) adſşta-pūrva, T. siar ma mthon-ba, C. # FT T .
82) sūnyatā-jñāna, T. ston-pa-rid-kyi ye-þes, C.
2. About this sūnyatā-jñāna,
see S. p. 76 (a quotation from the same Sūtra).
aurasa ( uras) (produced from the heart), T. thugs-las skyes-pa, but C. instead
has to be (because of their believing in the Buddha's word). AĀS as C.
But in the last sentence of this quotation, c. 1 7 and adds BE W D (pro-
duced from the Buddha's mouth), TE IE & TÆ TŁ W ,
being as the explanation of the word aurasa putra'. Cf. Manu Smộti IX, 166.
83)
[ 209 ]



J. TAKASAKI
sons of the Buddhas and be of no miscomprehension. O Lord,
[verily] they would be of perfect perception. For what reason?
[Because], O Lord, the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata is verily
the Supreme Eternity, the Supreme Bliss, the Supreme Unity and
the Supreme Purity. O Lord, those people 84) who perceive the
Absolute Body of the Tathāgata in this way, perceive perfectly.
Those who perceive perfectly are, O Lord, the legal sons of the
Buddhas &c. 85).
22
§ 2. Concordance between 4 Supreme Virtues and 4 Causes of Purifica-
tion 86).
And again, of these four Supreme Virtues of the Absolute Body of
the Tathāgata, one should know the reversed arrangement 87) according
to the order of causes. Here, 1) being opposite to the taking of delight
in 88) the 'impure' Phenomenal Life by the Icchantikas who have hatred
against the Doctrine of Great Vehicle, it should be understood that the
acquisition of the Supreme Purity is the result of Practice of the Faith
in the Doctrine of Great Vehicle' by the Bodhisattvas.
2) Being opposite to the taking of delight in the perception 89) of
unreal Ego by the Heretics who perceive an Ego in the individual things
consisting of five personality aggregates, it should be understood that the
acquisition of the Supreme Unity is the result of practice of supremacy
in the transcendental Intellect'. Indeed, all the other Heretics consider
the things consisting of form, etc. as the Ego though they are of the unreal
nature. And this very thing as has been perceived by the Heretics does
not correspond with 90) the (real] characteristic of Ego, hence it is always
non-Ego. On the contrary, the Tathāgata has attained the highest supre-
macy, 91) [knowing 92)] non-substantiality of all the phenomena by means
sarve
84) T. adds
after 'te.
85) Cf. AĀS 471 c f. (for the whole quotation).
86) Cf. BGŚ 798 b f.; AĀS 472 a f.
87) pratiroma-krama, T. bzlog ste, C. mentions the actual order # # # ).
88) abhirati, T. mnon-par dgaḥ-ba, C. [, and adds (graha).
89) graha, T. hdsin-pa, C. et H. For ·ātman’ of the Heretics, C. uses the
term • jaba ti
visamvāditva, T. slu-ba-dan Idan-pa (slu-ba, falsehood), C. EU E.
91) para-pārami-präpta, T. dam-pahi pha-rol-tu phyin-pa brões, c. ỞII -
. ‘ para' in the sense of “parama '.
92) So C. LED...). T. regards ‘para’ as an attribute to 'nairātmya '.
90) vis
[ 210 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
of his Wisdom perceiving the truth 93). And this very non-substantiality
as has been perceived by the Tathāgata is quite consistent with 94) the
characteristic of non-ego, hence there is always the implication of Ego
(ātman) 95), by taking non-Egoity (nairātmya) in the meaning of Ego,
as has been said:
“He stands by application of no standing place" 96).
95)
58) yathābhūta-jñāna, T. yan-dag-pa ji-lta-ba-bshin-kyi ye-ſes, c. kp Tom.
instrumental case-ending).
•:) avisamvāditva, C. T , # u 11.
ātmâbhipreta. C. ED THE H to em Hi Hi and seems to omit nairātmyam
eva ātmani krtvā'.
96) C. om. this quotation whose source is unknown, and adds the explanation of
* nairātmyam eva' (ED THE I) and · ātmâbhipreta' Kaj Ili), saying that the
former is in the sense of the absence of the Heretical ātman, while the latter is the
Buddha that has attained the ‘mighty Ego’. And furthermore, with reference to this
supreme Ego', C. adds a verse with commentary thereon. It runs as follows:
“如清淨真空得第一無我諸佛得淨體是名得大身
Having attained the highest Non-substantiality,
As the pure and real emptiness,
The Buddhas obtained the pure body.
Therefore, it is said that they attained the great body.
Here attained the great body' (18
means that the Tathāgata has
attained the highest pure Reality, the Absolute Body (0) -#1 RTE I),
which is the real nature He) of all the Buddhas. Having attained the self-control-
ling body 自在體), he got the pure body
F $). Therefore the Buddhas
are said to have attained the pure controlling[power] 1). In this
sense the Buddhas could be the highest powerful Ego - TË E) in the
Immaculate Sphere.
And again, with reference to this meaning, the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata
is not called the being #j). Because [all phenomena are] of non-substantial nature
(FHE FE #!), of the nature of non-being (
CEE ). Hence he cannot be called
* the being '. Because, as his nature, he himself is absent (KP TA BH FE #C).
At the same time, with reference to the same meaning, the Absolute Body of the Ta-
thāgata is not called non-being' (THE). Only because his body is the Reality itself (D
唯有彼真如我體) Hence, we cannot say
there is no Absolute Body. Because,
as his feature, he does exist. For this reason, when Heretics asked the Buddha whether
the Tathāgata would have body # #B) after death or not (THE SEB), etc., he
did neither explain (
TC)
nor reply time)”.
The verse mentioned at the top has a similarity to the verse IX-23 of the
t
[ 211 ]
15



J. TAKASAKI
3) Being opposite to the taking of delight in the cessation 97) of Suf-
ferings of the Phenomenal Life alone by those who belong to the Vehicle
of Śrāvaka and who have fear of the sufferings of Phenomenal Life, it
should be understood that the result of the practice o various kinds
of meditation, named Gaganagañjā, etc. is the acquisition of the Supreme
Bliss 98)
concerned with all matters, mundane and supermundane.
4) Being opposite to the taking of delight in the isolated 99) abode
by those who belong to the Vehicle of Pratyekabuddha and who are
indifferent to the benefits of living beings, it should be understood that
the Bodhisattvas practice of Great Compassion has the acquisition of the
Supreme Eternity as its result, because practising [for the sake of others]
Sūtrâlankāra, which runs as follows:
• śünyatāyām viếuddhāyām nairātmyān märgalābhataḥ /
buddhāḥ śuddhâtmalābhitvād gatā ātmamahātmatām // ".
?
Also, we can find a similar passage of the prose commentary mentioned above in
the following passage of the Sūtrâlankāra along with the next verse (IX-24) and the
commentary thereon. It runs as follows:
tatra cânāsrave dhātau buddhānām paramātmā nirdiśyate | kim kāraṇam ? /
agranairātmyâtmakatvāt / agram nairātmyam viếuddhā tathatā sāca buddhānām
ātmā svabhāvârthena tasyām visuddhāyām agram nairātmyam ātmānam buddhā
lābhante śuddham , ataḥ śuddha-ātmalābhitvād buddhā ātmamahātmyam prāptā
iti paramātmā vyavasthāpyate //
na bhāvo nâpi câbhāvo buddhatvam tena kathyate /
tasmād buddha tathāpraśne avyākſtanayo mataḥ //
tenaiva kāraṇena buddhatvam na bhāva ucyate | pudgaladharmabhāvalakṣaṇatvāt
tādātmakatvāc ca buddhatvasya / nâbhāva ucyate tathatālakṣaṇam bhāvāt / ato
buddhatvasya bhāvābhāvapraśne bhavati tathāgataḥ param maraṇān, na bhavatîty
evam ādir avyākſtanayo mataḥ 1/ (MSA p. 37–38).
Most probably the verse kept in C. is a quotation from the MSA by the commentator
from the same source he quoted in other passages (e.g. S. p. 71) and the present Skt.
text has a lacuna of this passage. One strong reason for this supposition is that BGś,
which has parallel passages with the Ratna. throughout the text, also mentions this verse
in the equivalent passage, but without commentary and regarding it as a 'sūtragāthā'
(), saying: = 1 THE # 017
to the Hunt # (798 a).
As for the prose commentary, however, it was probably not in the original text,
but we have no definite proof for saying this.
97) upaśama, T. ñe-bar shi-ba. C. om. it along with . abhirati' and instead has
'bhiru' (fear).
98) T. and C. add parama. (paramasukhapāramitā).
») asamsarga, T. hdu-hdsi med-pa (samsarga means "company ?), c.
for asamsargavihārabhirati).
[ 212 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
as long as the world exists, without interruption, their attachment 100)
to the benefits for living beings is perfectly pure.
Thus, 4 kinds of Supreme Virtues named Purity, Unity, Bliss and
Eternity are brought about on the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata as
the result of Bodhisattvas’ 4 kinds of practices, namely, those of Faith (in
the Doctrine of Great Vehicle), the Supremacy in the transcendental
Intellect, the Meditations and the Great Compassion, respectively.
And 101) because of these four [Supreme Virtues in the Absolute Body]
it is said, the Tathāgata is the highest Absolute Essence, he reaches up to
the limit of the space and he lasts as long as the utmost limit [of the
world] 102). Indeed, the Tathāgata, through the practice of faith in the
highest Doctrine of the Great Vehicle, has attained the highest state of
the Absolute Essence which is the ultimate purity, hence he has become
the highest Absolute Essence. Through the practice of the supremacy in
the transcendental Intellect, [the Tathāgata] has realized perfectly 103) the
non-substantiality of living beings and of the material world, just as the
sky (reaches up to the limit of the world]1 104) and, through the practice of
472 a;
BGŚ 798 c.
100) phaligodha in the text. T. yońs-su sbyon-ba (D) (parisodha, same as Ms. B.)
T. shows a sense similar to 'parisuddha ’, but from the context, the meaning 'attach-
ment or “clinging to seems better. For this meaning we have a word “paligodha'
(BHS Dic. s. v.) and if we change a letter 'n into 'r' in T. sbyon, we get this meaning,
hence “yons-su sbyor-ba ' might be the translation of 'paligodha'. As for the form 'pha-
ligodha ' instead of paligodha, we should record this form as a varia lectio, but most prob-
bably it is a wrong reading. (*pali’ is a rather common transformation of the prefix
* pari’ in Middle Indic. Cf. Pāli paligedha).
101) C. 7 TJ. On this
passage, cf. AĀS
102) Cf. Daśabhūmikasūtra (ed. by J. Rahder, p. 14).
dharmadhātu-vipulam ākāśadhātu-paryavasānam aparântakoținiştham”
(c. * n E **Avat S. 545 b, etc.).
These are used there as modifiers of “pranidhāna’ of Bodhisattvas. Cf. AĀS 472 a:
阿難,因此四德 一切如來實稱法界 不著有無
ppt LEEBE ETÈ. BGŚ 798 c;
是故佛說(therefore it is taught by the Buddha), 由此四德 一切如來
唯為法界勝由如虚空取虚空為邊際極後際,
103) nişthâgamana (lit, reaching up to the limit), T. mthar-thug-pa-ñid-tu rtogs-pa.
104) ākāśôpama (T. nam-mkhaḥ ltar) is relating to nișthāgamana. C. renders this
passage as follows: The Tathāgata completes the sky-like dharmakāya through (the
realization of] the absolute Anisha) non-Substantiality of bhājana-loka (om.
sattva).
The reading sarvatra parama-' is to be corrected into •sarvatra-parama-' (in
one compound).
[ 213 ]



J. TAKASAKI
various kinds of meditations named Gaganagañjā, etc. he has perfectly
perceived the omnipresence 105) of the power of the highest truth every-
where. Because of these two acquisitions, he reaches up to the limit
of space. [And lastly), through the practice of the Great Compassion,
[he has] mercy towards all living beings beyond the limitation of time.
Therefore, with reference to 106) this point, it is said he lasts as long as the
utmost limit [of the world].
§ 3. 4 Impediments to the Attainment of the Supreme Virtues 107).
108)
And now, for the acquisition of these four kinds of Supreme Virtues
of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, there are four Impediments
(paripantha) even in case of the Arhats, Pratyekabuddhas and those
Bodhisattvas who have obtained [10] Controlling Powers 109), though they
are abiding in the Immaculate Sphere 110). That is to say, 1) pheno-
menon of condition' (pratyaya-laksaņa); 2) phenomenon of cause' (hetu-
laksaņa); 3) phenomenon of origination (sambhava-lakṣaṇa); and 4) “phe-
nomenon of destruction’ (vibhava-laksaņa) 111). Here, 1) Phenomenon
of condition' means the Dwelling-place of Ignorance (avidyāvāsabhūmi) 112).
105)
parama-dharmaiśvarya, chos-kyi dban-phyug dam-pa. C. rendering of this
passage is as
sarvatra sarvadharmeșu aiśvarya-prāptatvāt ’.
106) upādāya. T. & C. show it by ablative case-ending only.
107) Cf. AÃS 472 b; BGŚ 799 a.
108) T. gegs, c. B. In BHS, it is mostly concerning the obstacles or impediments
in Bodhisattvas for attaining bodhi. Cf. the Rāstrapālaparipṛcchā, p. 18, 1. 1 ff.
109) vasitāprāpta-bodhisattva, T. dbar-thob-paḥi byar-chub-sems-dpaḥ, c. t to
.
It is not necessary to limit this qualification to those Bodhisattvas who abide on
the 10th bhūmi as mentioned in the Tibetan commentary. We can regard this “ vasitā-
prāpta ' as an epithet for Bodhisattwas in general. (Cf. Lankāvatāra, p. 274, 1. 21: sarva-
bodhisattvabhūmiņu vasitāprāptaḥ).
110) anāsravadhātu. It is equivalent to lokottara' and its counterpart is sāsrava'
equivalent to‘laukika'. The contrast between anāsrava and sāsrava will be seen in the
following passage.
111) Of these 4 terms, T. & C. are as follows:
1) rkyen-gyi mtshan-ſid, ! ; 2) rgyuḥi mtshan-ñiid, ; 3) hbyun-
baại mtshan-ñid, # ##; 4) hjig-paħi mtshan-ñid, b.
CF. BGś: 1) ti TJE; 2) *FE; 3) #j #JE: 4) FILE
JE (PO FIB). AĀS: 1) ; 2) ; 3) ;
4) E.
無明住地 but T. ma-rig-paḥi bag-chags-kyi sa (avidyā-vāsanā-
118) C.
[ 214 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāg a
[It is the condition of birth of the Body made of mind for the Saints]
just as Ignorance (avidyā) is [the condition] of Predispositions (sam-
skārāḥ) [for ordinary people). 2) 'Phenomenon of cause'
means the
Immaculate Action (anāsravam karma) 113) conditioned by the Dwell-
ing-place of Ignorance [as the cause of the Body made of mind], [and
it is to be compared with the Predispositions [of ordinary people] 114).
3) “ Phenomenon of origination ’ means the origination of the 3-fold Body
made of mind (manomayâtmabhāva.) 115), conditioned by the Dwelling-
place of Ignorance and caused by the Immaculate Action, just as the
origination 116) of the Three-Worlds (tribhava) 117) is conditioned by 4
kinds of Graspings (upādāna) 118) and caused by the Passioned Actions
bhūmi). which agrees with Ms. B reading. See S. p. 33, n. 6. Acc. to ŚMS (220 a), there are
said to be five vāsa-bhūmis, of which avidyā-vāsabhūmi is the basic and the strongest.
The other four are 1). L- tl È , T.Ita-ba geig-la gnas-paại gnas-kyi sa
(*ekadęstisthita-vāsabhūmi); 2) c. f, T. ḥdod-paħi ħdod-chag-la gnas-
paḥi ... (*kāmarāgasthita-v.); 3) c. FL, T. gzugs-kyi ḥdod-chag-la gnas-
paủi ... (*rūparāgasthita-v.), and 4) C. E EU, T. srid-paħi ħdod-chags-la
gnas-paḥi ... (*bhavarāgasthita-v.), and are said to be the basic kleśas from which all
the defilements in the form of intense outburst (paryavasthāna- or paryutthāna-klesa)
come out. Furthermore, it is said, these four are 'kșanika', while ‘avidyāvāsabhūmi'
(T. ma-rig-paḥi gnas-kyi sa) is 'anādikālikā' and cannot be destroyed except by
'bodhijñāna' of the Tathāgata; therefore, it is the strongest. In this sense avidyāvāsabhūmi
is here related to the defilement existing in Bodhisattvas in another passage in the
Ratna., this kleśa is said to be that of Arhats. see S. p. 67, 1. 17–19). As for the
meaning of 'vāsabūmi', there are traditionally two ways of interpretation: one is shown
in C. and T. translation of ŚMS, the other is shown in T. translation of the Ratna. It
relates more or less to the etymology of the term vāsanā (from V vas, to dwell, or from
vas, to perfume). The second interpretation is also shown in this Ratna., v. I, 130
where the term vāsanā’ is used for indicating 'avidyāvāsabhūmi’.
113) T. zag-pa med-paủi las, C. FLE . Here anāsravakarman, of which the
exact counterpart is sāsravakarman, is compared to samskāras in the sense that karman
is the cause of the next birth.
114) C. has confusion in interpreting this passage. C. says 'hetulakṣaṇa' means
avidyāvāsabhūmi-pratyayā saņskārāḥ', and from this samskāra, there is conditioned
anāsravakarman', just as ' vijñāna' is produced from • samskāra'. C. seems to regard
saņskāra ' of avidyā-vāsabhūmi as something different from 'anāsravakarman'. But
it may not be the case here.
115) (= manomaya-kāya), T. yid-kyi ran-bshin-kyi lus, c. #$. The body
of the saints is said to be consisting merely of 'mano-skandha', instead of 5 upādāna-
skandhas as in the case of ordinary beings.
116) abhinirvítti, T. mnon-par grub-pa, C. &.
111) T. srid-pa gsum, c. = (= tridhātu).
118) T, ñe-bar len-pa bshi, C. 19 FLX. Here 'upādāna’ is synonymous with
kleśa. The four upādānas are usually; 1) kāma; 2) dịști; 3) śīlavrata and 4) ātmavāda.
[ 215 ]



J. TAKASAKI
(säsravakarman) 119). 4) Phenomenon of destruction' means Death as
the inconceivable Transformation (acintyā pāriņāmiki cyuti) 120) condi-
tioned by the origination of the 3-fold Body made of mind. It corre-
sponds to the Decrepitude and Death (jarāmaraņa) conditioned by the
Birth (jāti) [in the Three-Worlds].
Now, the Arhats, Pratyekabuddhas and those Bodhisattvas who have
attained (10) Controlling Powers, have not extirpated the Dwelling-place
of Ignorance which is the ground of all the subsequent Defilements 121),
hence they cannot attain the Supreme Purity as the end of removal 122)
of all the dusts of defilements with their bad-smelling impressions 123)
And, on account of that Dwelling-place of Ignorance, and because of their
being accompanied with 124) the arising of the subtle-featured dualistic
view 125), they cannot attain ultimately 126) the Supreme Unity which is
characterized as no accumulation of Active Force 127). And, on account
of that Dwelling-place of Ignorance and Immaculate Action caused by the
arising of the subtle-featured dualistic view conditioned by the Dwelling-
place of Ignorance, there is (still] the arising of the Mind-made aggregate
119) T. zag-pa dan bcas-paủi las, C. *. See above (Note VIII–113).
120) T. mi-khyab-par yońs-su bsgyur-paủi șchi-hpho-ba, C. T DJ
Enne
5E (cyuti means literally “fall ). The counterpart of this death in the case of
ordinary beings is called C. EL GE, T. rgyun-chad-paħi ġchi-hpho (death as the
interruption of flowing). Cf. ŚMS 219 c (this term seems peculiar to ŚMS).
121) upakleśa, T. ñe-baủi non-mořs-pa, C. MIT Preto (om. upa). About avidyā-vāsa-
bhūmi being the ground of all upaklešas, see śMS 220 a: ko TE AJ
JI... MEVE TE PE (ñe-baủi ñon-mons-pa gan-gāḥi klun-gi bye-
ma-las ḥdas-pa sñed-kyi rten-du gyur-pa).
122) ... apakarșa-paryanta (lit. ending with the removal of ...). But the reading
is not clear. Both T. & C. take “ paryanta ' as 'atyanta' and attach it to śubhapāramitā
as an attribute. About apakarşa, T. reads instead 'bag-chags ... dan ldan-paủi phyir ’,
and c. #1... (apakarşâparyantatvāt).
123) daurgandhya-vāsanā. T. drir-baḥi bag-chags, but connects drir-ba with mala.
C. gives no translation of daurgandhya and has instead ' avidyāvāsabhūmigata-mala '.
124) C. reads as “... apakarşâ paryantatvāt’ 1 zie htio) instead of yogāt'.
125) sūkṣmanimitta-prapañca, C. 1. L.
126) C. as an attribute to ātmapāramitā. T. takes it probably as an attribute to
anabhisamskāra.
127) anabhisamskāra, T. ḥdus ma-byas-pa, C. Fl. C. takes this as an attribute
to all the 4 pāramitās along with atyanta.
The reading anabhisamskāram is, at I's suggestion, to be corrected into anabhisam-
skārām.
[ 216 ]



The Ratnagotra vibhāg a
(manomaya-skandha) 128). Therefore, they cannot attain the ultimate
Supreme Bliss as the extinction of this Spiritual Aggregate. And [lastly),
unless they realize the Essence 129) of the Tathāgata as being arisen from
the entire extinction of all impurities in forms of Defilements, Actions
and Originations, they cannot remove Death as the Inconceivable Trans-
formation. Consequently, they cannot attain the absolutely unchange-
able 130) Supreme Eternity.
Here, the Dwelling-place of Ignorance is to be compared with the Im-
purity of Defilements [in the case of ordinary people). The performance 131)
of Immaculate Action corresponds to the Impurity of Actions. [And]
the 3-fold origination of the Body made of mind and Death as the
Inconceivable Transformation corresponds to the Impurity of Origi-
nation 132)
ture 133)
And this passage is to be understood in detail according to the Scrip-
[It runs as follows]:
• O Lord, just as, being conditioned by [4] graspings and caused
by passionate actions, there are produced the three spheres of
existence; likewise, O Lord, being conditioned by the dwelling-
place of ignorance and caused by the immaculate actions, there are
born the 3 kinds of body made of mind of the Arhats, Pratyekabud-
dhas and those Bodhisattvas who have attained the [10] Controlling
Powers. [Thus] O Lord, for the birth of the 3-fold Body made of
mind in these 3 lands 134) and for the origination of the immaculate
actions the dwelling-place of Ignorance is the inevitable) condition,
& c.”.
Thus, in these 3 Bodies made of mind of the Arhats, Pratyekabuddhas
and Bodhisattvas, there are no Supreme Virtues of Purity, Unity, Bliss
128) T. yid-kyi ran-bshin-gyi phun-po, C. & B. See above (Note VIII-115).
129) C. has instead · dharmakāya’.
130) atyantânanyathābhāva, T. gshan-du gyur-pa med-pa, (om. atyanta), c. Tirane
#. C. connects atyanta to nityapāramitā.
131) abhisamskāra, T. regards it as an apposition to anāsravakarman.
132) samkleśa (T. kun-nas ñon-mors-pa, c. ) is a general term for all the process
of samsāra in which klesa, karman and janman are included. Sometimes, for janman, duḥkha
is mentioned (c. , # , #f the three); also, it is replaced by 'vipāka' or 'skandha-
dhātv-āyatana'. In all cases what is meant by them is the same Phenomenal Life.
133) ŚMS 220 a.
134) tisȚşu bhūmişu, T. om., but C. [lt] =HE EU (the lands of the 3 vehicles).
for
[ 217 ]



J. TAKASAKI
and Eternity. Therefore, it is said 135);
“ Only the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata is the Supreme Eter-
nity, the Supreme Bliss, the Supreme Unity and the Supreme Pu-
rity”.
§ 4. The Motives of the 4 Supreme Virtues 136).
Verily 137), the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata is pure
Because of his innate purity and removal of Impressions;
He is the highest Unity because he is quiescent,
Having destroyed 138) the dualistic view of Ego and non-Ego. // 37 //
He is blissful because the Mind-made Aggregate
And its causes have been removed (completely];
He is eternal because he has realized 139)
The equality of the Phenomenal Life and Nirvāņa. || 38 ||
In short, by two reasons there should be known the Supreme Purity
in the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata. That is to say, 1) through his
being perfectly pure by nature, as the common feature; and 2) through
his being perfectly pure by the removal of pollution, as the special feature
[to the Buddha) 140). The Supreme Unity, too, should be understood by
two reasons : 1) because of the removal of false imagination of Ego by
rejecting the extremity peculiar to the Heretics, and 2) because of the
removal of false imagination concerning non-substantiality by rejecting
135) ŚMS 222 a (c. W.
136) Cf. BGŚ 799 b; AĀS 472 b. Both of them have one passage preceding to it,
on the 4 troubles (1) corresponding to the respective impediments, namely: 1) KIT TE
WE; 2) * E; 3) & Welli; 4) j W (trouble by fault or death).
137) C. treats these two verses in prose and regards them as the commentary on the
quotation above mentioned.
138) kşaya, T. om., C. (having removed). C. om. ātma-.
180) prativedha, T. rtogs(-pa), c
..
140) sāmānyalakşana & viſeşalakṣaṇa, C. & respectively. T. as
usual.
sāmānya' means common to all living beings; therefore, it is the
(l) for the attainment of the highest purity. On the other hand, removal of
pollution is not innate to living beings, and the Buddha got his appellation because of
his attainment of this purity. Therefore, it is peculiar to the Buddha and shows the
superiority () of the Buddha.
Here
cause
[ 218 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
the extremity peculiar to the Śrāvakas. The Supreme Bliss is to be known
likewise by two reasons: 1) because of the abandonment of the origination
of all sufferings as well as the extirpation of succeeding origination 141) of
Impressions; and 2) because of the realization of all sufferings as well as
the realization of extinction of the Mind-made Aggregates 142). [And finally)
by two reasons the Supreme Eternity is to be known: 1) Because he does
not fall into the Nihilistic Extremity through his not diminishing 143)
neglecting the non-eternal Phenomenal Life; 2) nor does he fall into the
Eternalistic Extremity through his not intensifying 144) the eternal Nir-
vāņa. It is said as follows 145) :
“ If someone would perceive that all the Phenomenal Worlds are
non-eternal, O Lord, this view would be a Nihilistic Perception 146).
It would never be the true perception at all. If someone would
perceive that the Nirvāṇa is eternal, O Lord, this view would be
an Eternalistic Perception 147), And it would never be the True
Perception at all ”.
§ 4' (The Unstable Nirvāṇa).
Therefore, by this introduction to the theory 148) of the Absolute Es-
sence, it is said from the highest view-point that the Phenomenal Life itself
is Nirvāṇa, because [the Bodhisattvas) realize the Unstable Nirvāņa (apra-
tișthitanirvāṇa), being indiscriminative of both (the Phenomenal Life and
141)
anusandhi, T. mtshams-sbyor-ba, C. om. This vāsanā-anusandhi' corresponds
to manomayakāya of the Saints, and similarly 'duḥkha 'signifies that of ordinary people.
142) Both T. & C. have kāya instead of skandha. (But the meaning is the same)
Of these two columns, 1) shows an actual · annihilation' and 2), its cause. In other
words, to annihilate duḥkha means to realize that duḥkha is extinguished by nature, i.e.
there is no duḥkha in the ultimate sense. Logically, therefore, it would be better to consider
the annihilation of duḥkha and that of vāsanā as “two reasons'. C. shows this way of
interpretation, though it has some confusion on the way.
143) & 144) anapakarṣaṇa & asamāropana, (a negative particle is required before
samāropa. Hence the reading should be nirvāṇāsamāropaņa-). C. To the & T He,
respectively. BGś T ml & FIE Filet , resp. For apakarşana, T. has hbrid-pa,
which means to impose' and is close to samāropa (T. snon-pa) in its sense. From the
context, the reading in C. seems better.
145) ŚMS 220 a.
146) & 147) ucchedadſști & śāśvatadęsti, respectively.
148) nayamukha, T. tshul-gyi sgo, C. & M. For this passage, cf. BGŚ 799c.
[ 219 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Nirvāņa) 149). Moreover, they are neither entirely involved among all
living beings nor remote from them 150), for two reasons. Here, therefore,
the explanation will be made merely about how to attain this Unstable
stability 151). Then, for which two reasons ? Here, in this world, the Bodhi-
sattva is not entirely involved among all living beings because he has
completely rejected all tendencies of desires by means of the Transcen-
dental Intellect. [At the same time), he is not remote from them since
he never abandons them owing to his Great Compassion. This is the means
for the acquisition of the Supreme Enlightenment of which the Unstability
is the essential nature. By means of the Intellect, indeed, the Bodhisattva
has exterminated without remainder the tendency of desire, hence, being
deeply intent towards the Nirvāņa for his own sake, he does not stay
in the Phenomenal Life as the lineage of no Nirvāņa (aparinirvāṇagotra).
[At the same time), owing to his Great Compassion, he never abandons
those suffering people, hence, having activity 152) in this Phenomenal
Life, for the sake of others, he does not abide in the Nirvāṇa, as do those
who seek only for Quiescence (samaikayānagotra) 153).
Thus these two qualities (i.e. the Intellect and Great Compassion)
are the root, i.e. the foundation of the Highest Enlightenment. [So it
is said) 154):
[Though] Having destroyed affection for himself
By means of the Intellect, completely,
149) ubhayathā'vikalpana, c. but = TSH. Of this point, s.
& T. have no further explanation. But C. puts one verse which explains this point:
無分別之人不分別世間不分別涅槃涅槃有平等
(One who has non-discriminative (Wisdom] distinguishes neither Phenomenal Life nor
Nirvāṇa, and perceives the equality of both Nirvāṇa and Phenomenal Life).
This verse has a similarity to some extent with v. 39 in its contents, but it is diffi-
cult to identify both verses. C. om. the following sentences along with v. 39. These facts
seem to show that the original text was as C. (but the verse is a quotation) and that later
on that verse was replaced by the following passage along with v. 39.
150) āsanna-dūrī-bhāva. Lit. near and remote state.
151) apratisthita-pada, T. mi-gnas-paḥi gnas. The term pada signifies actually
nirvāņa.
prayoga, T. sbyor-ba.
153) T. shi-ba bgrod-pa gcig-paủi rigs. It signifies śrāvakayānika & pratyekabudd-
hayānika, in whom the mind of Compassion towards living beings is lacking. Being
opposed to either of them, aparinirvāṇagotra and samaîkayānagotra, Bodhisattvas may
be termed as “ parinirvāṇagotraka', and parinirvāṇa is, in the ultimate point, this apra-
tişthitanirvāņa.
154) This verse seems to be a quotation even if the preceding prose commentary
is genuine.
152)
[ 220 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
The Saint, being full of Mercy, does not approach
Quiescence because of his affection for the people;
Thus standing on 155) both the Intellect and Mercy,
These two means of Enlightenment,
The Saint approaches neither this world nor Nirvāṇa 156). // 39 //
5. The Functions of the Germ for its Purification (IV) 157).
Now, with reference to the subject of function' which is previously
maintained (in verse 35), what is shown by the latter half of that śloka?
If 158) there is no Essence of the Buddha,
There will be no aversion to Suffering,
Nor will there be desire nor earnest wish,
Nor prayer for Nirvāņa. // 40 //
So it is said 159)
):
“ O Lord, if there were no Matrix of the Tathāgata, then there
would arise neither aversion to Suffering nor desire for Nirvāṇa,
nor earnest wish for it or prayer for it ”.
Here, in brief, the Essence of the Buddha, the perfectly pure Germ 160),
even of those people who are fixed in the wrong way
161) has the two kinds
of foundation 162) of its actions. That is to say, it produces disgust
158)
155) niḥśritya, T. brten-nas.
The form niḥ-śri is etymologically a wrong reading
for ni-śri and probably caused by actual pronunciation, i.e. insertion of Visarga
after ni- before double consonant bearing a sibilant at the head. (e.g. nihsyanda for
nişyanda).
156) samvrti (covered) and nirvrti (dis-covered) in the text. T. as samsāra and
nirvāna.
157) Cf. BGŚ 799 c-800 c (4. karman).
sacet (BHS). Pāli sace.
159) ŚMS 222 6.
160) visuddhigotra, T. rnam-par dag-paủi rigs, C.
WE W (viếuddhi-hetu).
(CF., BGś, ). This is an apposition to buddhadhātu. See S. p. 6, 1. 9.
161) For mithyātvaniyata-, c. TÉ, (aniyata-sattvarāśi) and BGś
C. (T. as S.) .aniyata-' seems to be the original reading, since by the term “ mithyātvani-
yata, s.' the Icchantikas are implied and this passage does not refer to the Icchantikas.
pratyupasthāna, T. ñe-bar gnas-par byed-de (upasthita), C. HE LE... (to cause
to work). See Note VIII-211.
agree with
162)
[ 221 ]



J. TAKASAKI
6
6
6
witn Phenomenal Life basing itself upon 163) the perception of the fault of
Suffering, and it calls forth longing, desire, earnest wish and prayer for the
Nirvāṇa, basing itself upon the perception that happiness is the merit 164).
Here, 'longing' (chanda) means expectation' (abhilāşa) 165). • Desire ?
(icchā) means uncowardliness' (asamkoca) 166) for the attainment of the
intended object. Earnest Wish' (prarthanā) means
searching for
(parimārgaņā) 167) the means to attain the intended object. 'Prayer
(pranidhi) means will ' (cetanā) or 'manifestation (abhisamskāra) of the
mind '168.
The perception of Phenomenal Life and Nirvāņa, —
The former is full of Suffering, hence it is the fault,
The latter is of bliss, therefore it is the merit;
It exists only in case the Germ of the Buddha exists,
And does not exist with people of no Germ. || 41 ||
The perception that Phenomenal Life is full of suffering, hence is the
fault, and that Nirvāṇa is blissful, hence it is the merit, - this perception
belongs to those people who are possessed of good virtues 169) and exists
only in case the Germ [of the Tathāgata] exists. Thus this perception
does not take place without causes or without conditions. Indeed, if
it were without Germ 170), without causes and conditions and were not
brought about through the extirpation of sin 171), it would exist even with
163) niḥśrayena, c. A.
164) anusamsa, T. phan-yon, C. B e for sukhânusamsa. Here anusamsa stands
for guna in the following verse and corresponds to doșa in case of samsāra.
186) This sentence is lacking in S. But T. de-la ḥdun-pa ni mñon-par șhod-paḥo;
C. has a similar sentence. The context shows its necessity. The rendering from T. is
as follows:
tatra cchando bhilāṣaḥ
166) T. phyogs-pa (abhimukha, going ahead), c.T.
167) T. tshol-ba, c. id *& H. parimārgarā is a unique form in BHS for
Skt. parimārgana. For prârthanā, T. don-du gñer-ba (to provide for, to strive to pro-
cure), c. 1.
cetanā citâbhisamskāra, C. "U * TT, but T. om. cetanā.
169) śuklâmía, T. dkar-po [hi] cha / (so J's fn., but D. dkar-poủi chos... (śukladharma),
C. TR (= kušalamūla). Cf. BGś, # (as S.), together with an explanation of this
term (3 ambas- vi 5 (punya), #a(mukti), 5 (adhigama)).
Cf. Pāli sukkâmsa, bright lot, fortune.
gotram antarena. T. & C. om. it.
171) The reading should be corrected into 'pāpasamuccheddayogena' from pāpa-
samucchedayogena (acc. to T.).
168)
170)
[ 222 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
the Icchantikas who are of the lineage of no Nirvāṇa. Really, it cannot
take place unless they bring about the Germ which is purified from
accidental pollutions and the faith in any one of three Vehicles 172) through
being endowed with 173) the 4 kinds of good actions 174), beginning with
having contact with a personage of high virtue 175).
(The saying: the Icchantikas are of no Nirvāṇa, is only conventional) 176)
It is however said [in the Scripture) 177):
“ After this 178) the rays of the disk of the sun-like Tathāgata
179)
172) dharma is here used for yāna. T. chos, but c. JE (C. - The stands for
anyatamadharma).
173) samavadhāna, T. yan-dag-par hbyor-ba, C. 1 (to practise).
174) catuḥśukla. T. ḥkhor-lo bshi (catuścakra), which are, according to 0, 1) the
reliance upon a saintly personage; 2) the accumulation of virtue; 3) a favourable dwell-
ing-place; and 4) sublime vows and correct appreciation. They are the 4 wheels of the
great vehicle. There is, however, another fourfold group in Tibetan under the name of
* catuḥśukladharma (dkar-poủi chos bshi)' or caturākaraśukla (dkar-po rnam bshi) ' (they
are namely: 1) dge-baủi chos ma skyes-pa bskyed-pa, to produce good quality which has
not been produced; 2) skyes-pa mi-ñams-pa, to retain what is produced; 3) mi-dge-baḥi
chos skyes-pa spon-ba, to avoid the bad quality already produced; and 4) mi-dge-
baủi chos ma-skyes-pa rnams mi-bskyed-pa, to prevent the generation of bad quality
which has not yet appeared). The latter fourfold group seems not relevant to this
passage.
The third and perhaps the most suitable one is found in the Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra
of Mahāyāna. According to C. translation, it is called • [!L *? (catuṣkuśaladharma,
but most probably for catuḥśukladharma), and its four items are 1) to approach the per-
sonage of high virtue; 2) to attend and accept the teaching; 3) to contemplate the meaning
of the doctrine; and 4) to practise according to the teaching.
Cf. BGŚ C F (catur[ărya]cakra as T.), which are 1) Xp XE
£; 2) ; 3) #$t; 4) Titik. It has an explana-
tion of the term cakra'.
satpuruṣa, T. skyes-bu dam-pa, C. 善知識, which includes monks as well
as laymen.
176) Cf. BGŚ 787 c-788 C (破執分第二中破小乘執品第一),
where discussion is held around the existence of “buddhagotra' among various schools
of Buddhism.
177) Avat S. 616 b (in Chap. 32: Tathāgatôtpattisambhava-parivarta), according to
C. But a sentence closer to this quotation is found in JAĀ, 242 c. (as O’s note).
178) The reading “yatra hy āha / tatra paścād' is somewhat doubtful. T. gai-gi
phyir, de-ḥi hog-tu ... shes gsuns-so’ (yata āha | tataḥ paścãd ...), and C.
# PÉ (tasmād uktam Avatamsaka-gotrôtpattau / tataḥ paścäd ...).
179) T. adds jñāna after tathāgata.
175)
[ 223 ]



J. TAKASAKI
fall
upon
the bodies of even those people who are fixed in the wrong
way and make benefits for them 180). And furthermore producing
the cause of future [bliss] [in them), they cause them to thrive
with virtuous qualities 181).
And also the saying : the Icchantikas are by all means of the nature
of no Perfect Nirvāṇa " 182) is taught in order to remove the hatred against
the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle, this being the cause of their being Ic-
chantikas and refers to a certain period of time 183). Indeed, as there exists
the Germ which is pure by nature, none could be of the absolutely impure
nature 184). Therefore, with reference to the fact that all living beings,
with no difference, have the possibility 185) of being purified, the Lord
has said again
186)
“Though being beginningless, indeed,
[The Phenomenal Life] has its end 187);
Being pure by nature,
It is endowed with Eternity 188);
Being covered from outside
By the beginningless sheath [of defilements),
[This nature) is however invisible,
Just as the gold 189) concealed 190) [in sand and dust] ”.
180) Acc. to T. & C., one phrase of 'tān upakurvanti’ should be inserted. (T. de-
dag-la phan ḥdogs-par hgyur shin, c. PE B Fun.
181) kuſalair dharmaih, c. É X (sukladhamra).
182) In the Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra, &c.
183) According to O's interpretation. T. dus-gshan-la dgons-nas, c. f .
The meaning is that the Icchantikas remain as aparinirvāṇagotraka only for the certain
period of time when they have hatred against the doctrine of Mahāyāna, but not forever.
Cf. BGS 786 c:
AE.
184) -dharman (ifc.), T. om., c. RE.
185) bhavyatā, T. run-pa-ñid. This sentence and the following verse are missing
in C.
186) The source unknown.
187) avasānika, T. tha-ma dan ldan-pa. About this beginningless nature of sam-
sāra, see S. p. 72 11. 13–16. It should be noted that samsāra is not endless. See Note
VIII-242.
dhruvadharma.
189)
suvarņabimba Lit. “the shape of gold ’, T. gser-gyi gzugs.
190) paricchādita, T. bsgribs (= vịta).
188)
[ 224 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
(V) YOGA 191)
Now, with reference to the meaning of ' Union ’ (yoga), there is one
śloka.
(Kārikā 8)
Being the inexhaustible storage 192) of jewels of immeasurable
[The Germ of the Buddha is] like the Ocean;
(virtues,
It is akin to the lantern, because of its nature of
Being endowed with properties indivisible (from it] 193). // 42 //
§ 1. The Union of the Germ with the Factors of its Purification.
Here, what is shown by the former half of this śloka?
Because it consists of the sources 194) of the Absolute Body,
Of the Buddha's Wisdom and Compassion 195),
There is shown the similarity of the Germ with the ocean,
Through being receptacle, jewels and water. // 43 //
On account of three points, the Essence of the Tathāgata has a resem-
blance to the great ocean in three ways, respectively, and through this
191) Under this subject of 'yoga’, two kinds of “union' are discussed. One is the
union of dhātu, in the sense of hetu, with dharmakāya. The other is the relation of dhātu,
in the sense of dharmadhātu, i. e. phala, with its properties. And this union is an unsepa-
rable accompaniment (samanvāgama, avyatireka, sambaddha, avinirbhāga). That is to
say, being possessed of hetu of dharmakāya, consisting of prajñā and karuņā, a sattva is
called dhātu: and just because he is dhātu, consequently he is endowed with abhijñā,
jñāna and asravakşaya.
Cf. BGŚ 801 a (5. yoga), where ·āśrayaparivítti' and ' nirvāṇa’ are discussed along
with this subject.
192) akara, T.
gnas,
C.
198) Cf. DAŚ 893 b: kpt A , HL SHE.
194) dhātu, T. khams, c.
TPE sattvas are dhātu' because of their being • dhar-
madhātu-samgraha' of dharmakāya. dhātu, here in the sense of' hetu'. See commentary.
196) C. inserts · samādhi' ) between jñāna and karuņā.
..
[225]



J. TAKASAKI
similarity, the subject ' Union' should be understood in the sense that
the Essence of the Tathāgata is provided with causes (of its purification]
(hetu-samanvāgama) 196). Then, which are the three points? They are
namely: [its being provided with] 1) the cause of purification of the
Absolute Body (dharmakāyavisuddhihetu) 197); 2) the cause of the attain-
ment of Buddha's Wisdom (buddhajñānasamudāgamahetu); and 3) the cause
of the manifestation of Buddha's Great Compassion (tathāgatamahākaru-
ņāvſttihetu) 198). Here, 1) 'the cause of purification of the Absolute Body'
is to be known as the practice of faith in [the Doctrine of] the Great
Vehicle; 2) the cause of the attainment of Buddha's Wisdom', the
practice of the introduction to the highest Intellect and Meditation;
and 3) the cause of the manifestation 199) of Buddha's Great Compassion',
the practice of Bodhisattva's Great Compassion 200).
Here, the practice of faith in [the Doctrine) 201) of the Great Vehicle
has a similarity to the receptacle' because, in this [receptacle], there
is an accumulation 202) of the jewel of Intellect and Meditation as well as
the water of Compassion which are immeasurable and inexhaustible. The
practice of the introduction to the highest Intellect and Meditation has
a similarity to "jewel' because of its being indiscriminative and being
endowed with inconceivable and powerful virtues. The practice of Bod-
hisattva's Compassion has a similarity to 'water' because, in all the
world, it manifests the highest moisture with the feature of one and the
same taste 203). This coherence (sambaddha) 204) i.e. the accompaniment
6
196) T. rgyu dan Idan-pa, c. H i fit dhātu-samgraha' in the
verse is here explained by this hetu-samanvāgama ’.
197) Against J's note, T. (D) has “kāya ’.
198) C. has 1 (prāpti) instead of ‘vrtti'. But T. hjug-pa.
199) Against J's note, T. (D) has ' tathāgatamahākaruņā (de-bshin-gśegs-paủi thugs-
rje chen-po). About pravrtti’, T. always translates it into ḥjugs' without prefix.
200) T. distinguishes the karuņā of the Buddha from that of the Bodhisattva by
using 'thugs-rje' for the former and 'sñin-rje' for the latter.
201) T. has · dharma’ after “mahāyāna '.
samavasaraņa, T. ḥdu-ba (mixing up). C. simply "tasyām aparimeya-akşayat-
vāt’ and om..prajñāsamādhiratnakarunāvāri-samavasarana '. But, BGś
says
• It +
tj te till’, which is apparently
equal to S.
203) T. reads its nature of the highest moisture in all the world is endowed with
· and om. lakşana, which C. has. For prayoga, T. -dan Idan-pa, but C. 1T
(=pravſtti). Here prayoga has the sense of ‘presentation or manifestation in connection
with the term laksana (lakşaņa-prayoga, c. 15).
202)
one taste
[ 226 ]



The Rat nag otra vibhāga
(samanvāgama) 205) of these three things (the Absolute Body and others),
with these three causes, the practice of faith, etc., is here called
• Union'.
2.
The Union of the Germ with the Result of Purification.
Now, what is shown by the latter half of the sloka ?
In the immaculate basis 206), the supernatural faculties,
The Wisdom and Immaculateness 207) are inseparable from Reality;
Therefore, they have a resemblance to a lantern,
On account of its light, heat and colour 208). || 44 ||
The subject, “ Union' is here to be understood in the sense that
the Essence of the Tathagata is accompanied by the results [of its puri-
fication] (phala-samanvāgama), through its similarity to a lantern in
three ways on account of three points, respectively. Then, which are the
three points ? Namely, [the Essence of the Buddha is endowed with] 1)
the Supernatural Faculties (abhijñā); 2) the Wisdom by which the evil in-
fluence is destroyed, (āsravakşayajñāna); and 3) the Extinction of Evil
Influence (āsravakşaya) 209). Here, the 5 Supernatural faculties 210) have
a resemblance to “ light of flame' because they have a characteristic of
engaging in 211) the extinction of darkness which is opposite to the know-
207) C.
204) T. [-dar] ḥbral-pa, C. TO A.
205) T. -dan ldan-pa,
C. 畢竟不捨離 (absolutely inseparable).
206) vimalâśraya, T. dri-med-gnas, c. FIE S (vimala-dhātu). Here aśraya is
used for dhātu, and hence, vimalâśraya is synomynous with dharmakāya.
j, SE HA , for respective term.
208) Cf. DAS 893 b (v. 13): KH E AJJAL BH SEX
25 E ART.
209) T. & C. for these 3 terms are respectively:
1) mnon-par šes-pa, il ( = il); 2) zag-pa zad-paḥi ye-ses, FH
(jñāna in the verse, T. ye-ses, c. ** ); 3) zag-pa zad-pa, (vaimalya in the verse,
T. dri-med, PIE VE).
210) 1) rddhi-visaya-jñāna-sākṣātkriyā-abhijñā; 2) divyacakṣuḥ -j.-s.-a; 3) divyaśro-
tra-j.-s.-a.; 4) paracetaḥ-paryāya-j.-s.-a.; & 5) pūrvanivāsânusmrti-j.-s.-a. Cf. Mvyut. 14.
pratyupasthāna, T. ñe-bar gnas-pa (originally from Pāli paccatthāna). In
C. of Va , E stands for this term and shows the meaning of being
capable of '.
C.
211)
[ 227 ]
16



J. TAKASAKI
6
ledge which perceives an object 212). The Wisdom by which the Evil In-
fluence is destroyed is similar to “heat' because of its characteristic of
engaging in consuming the fuel 213) of the Active force and Defilements,
leaving no residue.
The Extinction of Evil Influence as the [result of] the Perfect Mani-
festation of the Basis has resemblance to colour' because of its charac-
teristic of being perfectly stainless (vimala), pure (viśuddha) and radiant
(prabhāsvara). Here, it is stainless' because it has destroyed the Ob-
struction caused by moral Defilements. It is pure' because it has de-
stroyed the Obstruction on account of knowable things. It is “radiant
[by nature] because these two [Obstructions] are merely of an occasional
nature 214). Thus, in brief, the properties of those people who have nothing
further to learn 215) summarized in these seven, i.e. the 5 Supernatural
Faculties, the Wisdom destroying the Evil Influence and the Destruction
[of Evil Influence] 216), are in the Immaculate Sphere, inseparable from
each other, not different [from each other] and coherent with 217) the
Absolute. This point is here called Union '.
And with reference to this subject of Union', the example of a lan-
tern is to be understood in detail according to the Sūtra 218).
• O Śāriputra, just as a lantern is of indivisible nature and its
qualities are inseparable from it 219). That is to say, it is] indi-
visible [inseparable), from light, heat and colour. The precious stone
is also [indivisible, inseparable], from its light, colour and shape.
In the same way, O Śāriputra, the Absolute Body, taught by the
212) arthânubhava, T. don ñams-su myon-ba, C. EN $. T. om. jñāna.
213) C. om. indhana (T. bud-sin).
214) T. reads as tad-ubhaya-āgantukatā-aprakſtitaḥ' (glo-bur-pa-ñid-kyi ran-
bshin ma yin-pahi phyir-ro, being āgantukatā, they are not the innate character).
C. reads 如自性清淨體彼二是客壓煩惱, its being the body
of innate purity, these two are occasional defilements), taking prakſti as cittaprakſti.
215) aśaikșa-sāntānika, T. mi-slob-paủi rgyud, C. SHE I.
216) prahāņa, T. spans-pa, c. WIE K M. It stands for āśrayakşaya. Instead of
sapta’, C. counts 6 anāsravajñānas and prahāņa separately. T. adds anāsrava before
abhijñā.
211) For samanvāgama, C. has a peculiar translation,
PŠ (samân-
vāgama?).
218) AAN 467 a. C. om. the whole paragraph after eșa ca yogârtham...'. Cf.
DAS 893 b, which quote the same passage.
219) avinirmukta-guna. Here the word jñāna, which appears in the case of dharma-
kāya (avinirmuktajñānaguņa), is omitted.
[ 228 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhāg a
Tathāgata is of indivisible nature, of the qualities inseparable
from Wisdom (i.e. Enlightenment). That is to say, [indivisible,
inseparable), from the Properties of the Tathāgata which are far
beyond the sand of the Gangā in number”.
(VI) VẶTTI 220)
Now, with reference to the meaning of
the meaning of 'manifestation' (vștti),
there is one śloka.
(Kārikā 10)
2
The Ordinary People, the Saints, and the Buddhas,
They are indivisible from Reality 221)
Therefore, the Matrix of the Buddha 222) exists among [all] living
beings; -
Thus it is taught by the perceivers of the Reality. || 45 ||
What is shown by this sloka ?
The Ordinary People are of erroneous conception,
Being opposite to them, [the Saints are the perceivers of the truth, 223)
And being of the perfectly 224) right conception,
The Buddhas are apart from the dualistic view. || 46 ||
In connection with the introductory teaching 225) of the Non-discrimi-
native Wisdom, it has been taught, in the Prajñāpāramită, etc., for the
Bodhisattvas that the Essence of the Tathāgata 226) has the general charac-
220) Cf. BGS 805 c f. (6. vịtti).
221) T. reads as
* tathatā-vyatirekataḥ' and inserts vștti (manifests the tathatā in
different way), but C. as usual.
222) jinagarbha
tathāgatagarbha.
223) dystasatya = tattvadarsin (c. Tf Xi), T. bden-pa mthon-ba.
224) yathāvat
samyak.
225) mukhôvadāna, T. sgo-la gdams-pa, C. 智法門
(in the sense of dharma-
mukhấuadāna).
226) T. as locative, in the sense ' with reference to tathāgatadhātu'. C. also as loca-
tive, but regards dhātu as dharmadhātu (kn * £ 1). Consequently, it shows a
slight difference in the meaning.
[ 229 ]



J. TAKASAKI
teristic of being Reality, the perfect purity, i.e. the Suchness 227) of all the
elements. On the basis of this general characteristic, it should be known
in brief, there are threefold different manifestations (pravſtti)
228) of three
kinds of people:... of the Ordinary People who do not perceive the Truth,
of the Saints who perceive the Truth and of the Tathāgata 229) who has
attained the ultimate purity. In other words, they are of the erroneous
conception' (viparyasta), “ of the right conception' (aviparyasta), and of
the perfectly right conception 230) and of no dualistic view', respectively.
Here, 'of the erroneous conception' is because Ordinary People have
delusion on account of their conception, mind and perception 231). Of
the right conception' is because the Saints, being opposite to them, have
destroyed the delusion. [And lastly], "of the perfectly right conception
and of no dualistic view' is because the Perfectly Enlightened Ones have
dispelled the Obstructions of moral defilement and of knowable things
along with their Impressions.
(VII) AVASTHĀPRABHEDA 232)
Hereafter, with reference to this subject of “manifestation ’, other
four subjects should be understood through the detailed explanation [on
each subject]. Here, [first of all], with reference to the subject, “ diffe-
rent states (avasthāprabheda) ’among these three kinds of people, there
is one śloka.
(Kārikā 10)
Impure, (partly] pure and [partly] impure,
And perfectly pure —
these are said of
228)
227) tathatā. In this translation, I repeated the word tathatā twice in order to make
the meaning clear.
vrtti. T. & C. has the same translation as in the case of vrtti.
229) C. adds dharmakāya after tathāgata.
230) C. om. here samyug-aviparyasta.
231) samjñā, T. \du-ses, C. AL ; citta, T. sems, C. "L"; dựști, T. lta-ba, C. ,
pectively. Cf. Yogācārabhūmiśāstra vol. 8 (Taisho, XXX, p. 314 b): 1) samjñāviparyasta
• anitye vastuni nitya-parikalpa-pravſttiḥ; 2) drști-v. means “tatparikalpite chan-
daḥ, abhilāṣaḥ; and 3) citta-v, means abhilașitakleśasya kriyā’. Also cf. BGŚ 806 a.
232) Cf. BGŚ 806 a; AĀS 469 C.
res-
means
[ 230 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
>
The Ordinary beings, the Bodhisattvas 233)
And the Tathāgata, respectively 234). || 47 ||
What is shown by this sloka ?
6
The Essence [of the Buddha] 235), [hitherto briefly explained]
By these six subjects, beginning with own nature ,
Is, in accordance with its 3 states,
Designated by 3 different names. || 48 //
Any teaching referring to the immaculate Essence [of the Buddha) 236),
taught by the Lord in detail through various divisions of Scripture 237) is
hitherto briefly summarized by six subjects, namely, “ own nature ', 'cause'
[of purification], "result' [of purification], "function [towards purifi-
cation), ‘union' (with the cause and result), and 'manifestation ²238). This
very Essence of the Buddha is here to be known as being taught through
the teaching of 3 different names in accordance with its 3 states, respectively.
That is to say, 1) in the 'impure' (aśuddha) state [the Essence of the
Buddha is named) “ the Ordinary Beings' (sattvadhātu) 239); 2) in the
*[partly] pure and [partly] impure' (aśuddhasuddha) state, the Bodhi-
sattva; and 3) in the perfectly pure' (suviśuddha), the Tathāgata.
It has been said by the Lord 240).
“ O Śāriputra, this Absolute Body, when it is covered with the
limitless 241) sheath of defilements, being carried by the stream of
233) For ārya in the previous Kārikā. Here it is specified that ārya is par excellence
the Bodhisattvas.
234) Cf. DAŚ 893 a: Temple tale
ER Rp 3k.
235) For dhātu, c. 3 P.
236) anāsravadhātu. For dhātu, T. khams, C c. P.
237) nānādharmaparyāyamukheșu.
c. F F E M'I (mukheșu = dvāreņa).
238) It shows us that the 6 subjects mentioned above are the fundamental categories
by which any kind of teaching can be summarized, whereas the remaining four subjects
are peculiar to the tathāgatadhātu, as forming sub-divisions of the sixth category, vịtti
See note VIII-8. As for the six padârthas, see Appendix, III.
238) C. . Here sattvadhātu stands for pệthagjana.
240) AAN 467 b. Cf. AĀS 469 c.
aparyanta... koți (-gūdha), T. bye-ba mthaḥ-yas-pas (gtums-pa), (koți is
regarded as a unit of number), c. A ; THE BE... HT W).
[ 231 ]



J. TAKASAKI
the Phenomenal Life and moving to and fro between death and
birth in the course of the beginningless 242) Phenomenal Life, is
called 'the [ordinary) living beings'. This same Absolute Body,
O Śāriputra, when it has become averse to the Suffering in the stre-
am of Phenomenal Life and become free from all the objects of desire,
doing the practice towards Enlightenment by means of the 10
Supreme Virtues 243) as including and representing 244) all of the 84
thousands groups of Doctrines 245), it is called “the Bodhisattva'.
Furthermore, O Śāriputra, this very Absolute Body, when,
having been perfectly released from all the sheaths of defilements,
having surpassed all the Sufferings, having rejected all stains of
subsequent defilements, it has become pure, perfectly pure, and,
abiding in the Absolute Essence which is the highest point of
purity 246), ascending to the stage to be looked upon 247) by all living
beings, has attained the unexcelled, manly strength 248) among all
6
242) anavarágra, T. thog-ma dan tha-ma med-pa (of neither bottom nor top, without
beginning nor end), C. BE THEE ha (of beginningless time). As an epithet to samsāra,
it has its origin in Pāli anamatagga, which seems to mean whose beginning is unknown',
(an'-amata-agga, an•= anu, a prefix of intensitive sense). (viz. V. P. Bapat, Review
of Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Dictionary, ABORI, vol. XXXV, p. 234-5). By Sanskriti-
zation, anamata was changed into anavara (reason unknown) and regarded as the compound
of 'an-avara-agra'. T. translation shows this sense. On the contrary, C. has retained
the original sense of this term. In Sanskrit sources, however, this term was interpreted
in two ways. We have a good example in Candrakirti's Prasannapadā.
pūrvā prajñāyate koțir nety vāca mahāmuniḥ /
samsāro’navarâgro hi nâsyâdir nâpi paścimam // (MK XI, 1)
uktam hi Bhagavatā | Anavarâgro hi, bhikṣavo, jātijarāmaraṇasamsāra iti /
avidyā-nivaraṇānām ... sattvānām ... samsaratām ... pūrvakoțir na prajñāyata
iti // (Prasannapadā, Poussin, p. 218) (Cf. SN II, 178, 193: III, 144, 151, etc.).
Here I suppose that the term anamatâgga had originally the sense 'pūrvā koțir
na prajñāyate', but from the literal meaning of its Sanskritized form “anavarâgra’, a
new interpretation of “nâdir nâpi paścimam' was added to its meaning.
243) daśapāramitāḥ. Besides the 6 pāramitās taught in the Prajñāpāramitā, ' upāya ’,
'pranidhi', 'bala', and “jñāna are counted under this.
244) antargata, lit. represented by or summarized in [the 10 pāramitās).
246) dharmaskandha, T. chos-kyi phun-po, c. XM (=##, £.). The
number of group is usually counted as 84 thousand. It is used in nearly the same sense
as dharmaparyāya or dharmapițaka.
246) paramavisuddhadharmatā, c. ###
247) Klokaniya, T. blta-bar bya-ba, c.
I.
248) advitiyam pauruşam sthāma, T. gñis-su med-paḥi skyes-buḥi mihu, C. THE
* (there is nobody superior to him).
p
[ 232 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
knowable spheres, and has attained the Controlling Power on
all separate elements, which is of no obstruction 249) and of no
hindrance, then it is called the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfectly
Enlightened One”.
(VIII) SARVATRAGA 250)
The Essence of the Tathāgata is 'all-pervading (sarvatraga) ' in these
three states. With reference to this meaning, there is one śloka.
(Kärikā 11)
Just as being of indiscriminative nature,
Space pervades everywhere,
Similarly all-pervading is the Essence,
The immaculate nature of the mind 251). || 49 ||
What is shown by this Sloka ?
It pervades with common feature
The defective, the virtuous and the ultimate 252)
Just as space occupies all the visible forms 253)
Either inferior, middle, or superior. || 50 ||
That which is the indiscriminative Innate Mind (cittaprakſti) 254) of the
ordinary people, of the Saints and of the Buddhas has a common feature
in these three states, irrespective of their being defective, virtuous or the
ultimate point of pure virtue. Therefore, just as space penetrates all the
receptacles regardless of material, whether clay, silver or gold, it is all-per-
249)
anāvaraņa-dharma, T. sgrib-pa med-paủi chos-can, C. WE — UJJ B.
250) Cf. BGS 806 b (8. sarvatraga); AĀS 469 c-470 a.
261) cittaprakſti-vaimalyadhātu, T. sems-kyi ran-bshin dri-med dbyiris, c.
FIE VO U (prakſti-vaimolya-citta).
252) doşa, T. gñes-pa, C. 10 ; guna, T. yon-tan, C. IT TO ; nisthā, T. mthar-thug,
c. ,
respectively. nişthā is replaced by ‘guņaviśuddhinişthā’ in the commen-
tary. Of these three, see next (IX) Avikāra.
263) rūpagata (= rūpa). T. gzugs-, C. . viz. BHS Dic. 8. v.
254) c. ll. T
T. as
in the Kārikā.
[ 233 ]



J. TAKASAKI
vading, all-embracing, equal, of no difference and is present always 255).
For this reason, it has been said in the same scripture 256),
256), immediately
after the explanation of different states:
“Therefore, o Śāriputra, the [ordinary] living beings and the Ab-
solute Body are not different from each other. The living beings
are nothing but the Absolute Body, and the Absolute Body is
nothing but the living beings. These two are non-dual by meaning,
and different merely by letters".
(IX) AVIKĀRA 257)
Now, the Essence of the Tathāgata, being all-pervading in these three
states, is, moreover, unchangeable (avikāra) either by Impurity or through
purification 258). With reference to this subject, there are 14 ślokas.
[Prior to the explanation of these ślokas], the summarized meaning 259)
of these ślokas is to be known by the following verse:
Being possessed of faults by occasion,
It is, however, endowed with virtues by nature;
Therefore it is of unchangeable character
In the beginning as well as afterwards 260). || 51 ||
In the impure state as well as in the pure and impure state, which
are shown by the [first] 12 ślokas and by the [next] one śloka, respective-
255) prāptā sarvakālam, C. — UJJR #1. T., connecting nirvisişļā with this
phrase, has “dus tham-cad-du khyad-par med-par gyur-pa'.
A quite equivalent passage is found in AĀS (469 c), which is quoted in BGS (806 b)
with a heading to FITE H A (as has been said in the Anuttarâśrayasūtra).
256) AAN 467 b.
257) Cf. BGŚ 806 c (9. Avikāra) Under this subject, it treats avikāritva' from 6
points, viz. pūrva-paryanta, samkleśa-vyavadāna, jāti, pravrtti, sthiti, and bhanga. Fur-
thermore it adds the 9 illustrations on klesa there.
268) samklesa-vyavadāna, c. (impurity and purity).
259) pindârtha, T. bsdus-has-paḥi don, C.
DR.
260) The same verse appears in BGŚ 806 c: 客壓相應故有自性德
故如前後亦爾是無變異相. It is regarded in BGS as a verse from
the Sandlinirmocanastra (如佛為海智菩薩說解節經偈言,We
cannot, however, find out any similar verse in the present texts of the Sandhinirmocana.
For dharmati, C. 真法體, BGS 相,
[ 234 ]



The Rat na gotravibhāga
ly, [the Essence of the Tathāgata) is possessed of faults caused by funda-
mental and subsequent defilements ‘by occasion ’. [On the contrary],
in the perfectly pure state, shown by the 14th śloka, it is essentially
endowed with the Buddha's virtues 261) which are indivisible [from the
Absolute Body], inseparable from Wisdom 262), inconceiva le and far gre-
ater in number than the sands of Gangā. Therefore it is explained that
the Essence of the Tathāgata 263), like space, is of absolutely unchangeable
character throughout different states 264).
(A) Unchangeability in the Impure State
First of all, with reference to the subject of 'unchangeability '[of
the Essence of the Tathāgata] in the Impure State, what is said in 12
ślokas ?
(Kārikās 12–23)
Just as space, being all-pervading,
Cannot be polluted because of its subtle nature;
Similarly, abiding everywhere among living beings 265)
This [Essence 265)] remains unpolluted [by defilements). // 52 //
w
261) dharma guna.
262) amuktajña (BHS, adj.). This is an abbreviated form of “avinirmuktajñāna'
which occurred in a quotation from AAN (S. pp. 3 & 39) and its first use is probably in
ŚMS (see quotations from ŚMS in S. pp. 55 & 76). This is a special adjective to buddha-
dharma or -guna, showing inseparability of guņa from buddhajñāna, i.e. bodhi. Therefore,
T. bral mi-ses or C. TIE (unreleased) does not exactly convey its meaning.
It should be 'ye-ses dan ma bral-ba’. See Note 1-23.
263) For dhātu, c. I kn PE.
264) C. treats this passage in verse.
265) A doubt about the reading “ sattve’ in the text (for satvo in Ms. B) is raised by
Prof. V. V. Gokhale, who, indicating the identification of this verse with v. XIII, 32 in
the Bhagavadgitā, suggested the reading sattvas instead of sattve, being the subject
noun for ' ayam'. (A Note on Ratnagotravibhāga I, 52 Bhagavadgitā XIII 32. Stu-
dies in Indology and Buddhology, Presented in Honour of Prof. S. Yamaguchi, Kyoto,
1955, pp. 90–91). However, as far as the independent use of ' ayam 'is concerned, there
seems to be no problem, since this verse is in a series of Kārikās and ayam denotes · cit-
taprakſtivaimalyadhātu ’ in v. 49. (So C. translates ayam into 2 PE , buddhadhātu).
A similar case is found in v. 54, where enam is also used independently, denoting the same
subject of cittaprakſtivaimalyadhātu (C. also · Obe PE'). T. & C. seem to support
the reading in loc., but T. reads the second line as “sarvasattveșv avasthitas tathā’yam
nôpalipyate / Here 'sattvu' seems to be used in a collective sense, the same as sattvadhātu.
2
-
[ 235 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Just as the worlds have everywhere
Their origination and destruction in space;
Similarly, on the basis of the Innate Essence 266)
The sense-organs appear and disappear 267). // 53 //
Just as space has never been burnt 268).
By the fire [at the end of the world];
Likewise the fires of death, of illness and decrepitude 269)
Cannot consume 270) this [Essence of the Buddha] 271). || 54 ||
The earth is supported by water,
Water by air, and air by space;
Space has, however, no support
Neither in air, nor in water, nor in the earth. || 55 ||
Similarly all the component elements [of Phenomenal Life] 272)
Have their foundation in the Active Force and Defilements,
And the Active Force and Defilements exist always
On the basis of the Irrational Thought 273). || 56 ||
The Irrational Thought is founded
In the [innate] mind which is pure 274),
The innate mind has, however, no support
In any [of the worldly) phenomena. || 57 //
All the component elements of Phenomenal Life
266) asaņskrta-dhātu, T. ḥdus ma
na-byas dbyins, C.
THE (= anāsravadhātu).
It seems to indicate cittaprakſti (see v. 57).
207) CE. DAŚ 893 a (v. 12): pH — UJJ V Here TR
of kn # FE .
268) dagdha-pūrva.
269) mộtyu, vyādhi, jarā: T. ḥchi-ba, na-ba, rga-ba; c. JE, , , resp.
270) Grammatically the form should be 'pradahanti ' instead of 'pradahati ’.
271) CE. DAŚ 893 a (v. 11): * ku th The go
# SE TI T.
272) skandha-dhātv-indriya skandhâyatanadhātavaḥ (vv. 58, 61), T. phun-po [dan]
kham [dan] dban [-po] (= skye-mched), C.
FR Beat). By these, all the
Phenomenal world is indicated.
ayonimanaskāra ayoniśomanaskāra, ayonisomanasikāra. T. tshul-bshin
ma-yin yid[-la] byed[-pa]: C. T * ME, TIE ME, TE ,
9B .
274) cittaviſuddhi = cittaprakſti, cittasya prakſti, prakti. c.UU,
WU, P, resp.
273)
[ 236 ]



The Rat nag otra vibhāga
Are known as akin to the earth,
And the Active Force and Defilements of living beings
Are known as akin to water. // 58 //
The Irrational Thought is known
As having resemblance to air;
Being of no root and of no support 275)
The Innate Mind is like space. || 59 ||
Abiding in 276) the Innate Mind,
There occurs the irrational action of mind 277).
By the Irrational Action of mind,
The Active Force and Defilements are produced. // 60 //
All the component elements of Phenomenal Life,
Originated from the water-like Active Force and Defilements,
Show their appearance and disappearance (repeatedly],
Just as [the world repeats its) evolution and devolution 278). || 61 ||
The Innate Mind is like space,
Being of no cause or condition,
Or complex [of producing factors) 279),
It has neither origination nor destruction,
Nor even stability [between two points). || 62 |
The innate nature of the mind is brilliant
And, like space, has no transformation at all;
It bears, however, the impurity 280) by stains of desires, etc.
Which are of accident and produced by wrong conception 281). || 63 //
*
..
275) For 'tad', T. has de-bshin' (tadvat).
276) ālina (ā li) (c. acc.), T. gnas, c. ff... This word reminds us of alayavijñāna.
277) ayoniśo manasaḥ krtiḥ ayoniścmanasikāra.
278) tat-samvarta-vivartavat (lit, devolution and evolution). For samvarta, T. hjig-pa,
c. band for vivarta (= vividham vartate), T. hchags-pa, c. JË. These are two of
four periods within one Kalpa, a circle of world process. The 4 are namely: vivarta (f),
vivartasthāyin (!), samvarta ), and samvartasthāyin (2, empty).
279) sāmagri, T. tshogs-pa, c. F A.
280) T. shows negative sense: ñon-mons mi-hgyur'. But C. as S. 客座煩
p
Negative interpretation of T. with respect to pollution by ägantukakleśa seems to
be the usual way in Tibetan tradition. See Note VIII-305.
281) abhūtakalpa, T. yan-dag min rtogs, C. SS. It stands for ayoni-
śomanasikāra. See S. p. 12, 1. 3 (vikalpa
(vikalpa = ayoniśomanasikāra).
6
[ 237 ]



J. TAKASAKI
§ 1. Unoriginated Character of the Innate Mind.
By this analogy of space, how is the unchangeable character of the
Essence 282) of the Tathāgata in the impure state explained ? It is said
as follows 283).
The accumulation of water-like Active Force and Defilements
Cannot produce 284) this space-like [Innate Mind),
And even the growing fires of death, of illness and old age
Cannot consume [this Innate Mind). || 64 //
The origination of the world classified into [5] elementary groups, [18]
component elements or [12] bases of cognition is conditioned by the accu-
mulation of water-like Active Force and Defilements, which is, in its turn,
based upon wind-circle 285) of Irrational Thought. But this origination
of the world never causes the evolution 286) of the Innate Mind which has
a resemblance to space. In the same way, a group 287) of fires of death,
of illness and decrepitude arises in order to destroy 288) the world classified
into five elementary groups, 18 component elements or 12 bases of cogni-
tion which is founded on the accumulation of air-like Irrational Thought
and water-like Active Force and Defilements 289). But even by this ari-
282) For dhātu, T. sñin-po, c. kp * 2.
283) C. has other two verses before v. 64. From the context in the following commen-
tary, both S. & T. seem to have a lacuna of two verses here.
Two verses in C. run as follows:
1) TIE E ME
THIK RT-;
2) PEU # # Rp 95 MEAT HIT THE
C. regards the first sentence in the commentary as the explanation of the first verse,
and the next sentence as that of the next two. And, as J suggested, the term ayoniso-
manasikāra is required by the prose commentary and also there might be terms such as
loka or skandhāyatanadhātavaḥ in verses. C. seems, however, to have failed to catch
the contrast between vivarta and samvarta by treating ayoniśomanasikāra and kleśakarma
as something of destructive force.
J's further suggestion of v. 64 as a quotation is not reasonable, since this text puts
always a certain number of commentary verses after original Kārikā or Kārikās.
282) abhinivartayati. C. klik is probably a misunderstanding.
285) vāta-mandala, T. rlun-gi dkyir-ḥkhor, C. Jl .
286) vivarta
abhinirvarta. For 'vivarto na bhavati ”, c. Ti E TEL.
287) skandha, T. tshogs, (= samcaya, rāśi, accumulation). C. om.
288) astamgama, T. hjig-par byed-pa, C. ben (=nirodha).
280) C. inserts • IT(samskāra) after karma- TT TT II TK).
[ 238 ]



The Ratnago tra vibhāga
sing of the fires of death, etc., it should be known that the Innate Mind
cannot be destroyed. Thus, in the impure state, though all the Impurity
of Defilements, of Active Force and Birth show their appearance and dis-
appearance like the material world 290), the Innate Essence of the Tathā-
gata is, like space, of no origination and destruction. Therefore, it is explai-
ned as being absolutely of unchangeable character.
And this example of space which refers to the introduction to the light
of doctrine 291) on the Innate Purity (of the mind) is to be understood in
detail according to the Scripture 292) :
66 O Honourable 293) Men, Defilements are the darkness 294), the Pure
[Mind] 295) is the light. Defilements are of weak power but the
correct intuition 296) is powerful. Defilements are merely accidental,
but the Innate Mind is of a pure root 297). Defilements are of
wrong discrimination, but the Innate Mind is indiscriminative.
For example, O Honourable Men, this great earth has its foundation
in water. Water is supported by air, and air is founded on space.
But space, in its turn, has no foundation. Thus, among these four
gross elements, space is more powerful 298) than any of the other
three elements, earth, water or air. It is also firm, immovable,
neither increasing nor diminishing 299), neither originated nor dest-
290) bhājanaloka, T. snod-kyi hjig-rten, C. of PI P (opp. to sattvaloka).
291) dharmâlokamukha, T. chos snar-baħi sgo,
c. MS. dharmâloka’ would mean
dharma as āloka’, and hence dharmâlokamukha means dharmamukha as C. translated.
292) Against C. attribution, this quotation is from the Gaganagañjā-paripịcchā
as 0 found. Cf. * \ (Taisho, XIII, p. 124 e).
*** T H , vol. 8 (Taisho, XIII, 643 b-c).
293) mārşa, T. dran-sron-chen, maharşi C. T F (*)
294) kavi (probably chavi is the better reading), T. mun-pa (= tamas), C. SHE (--
, mrşa ?). In contrast with ‘āloka’, T. translation is better, and "chavi' here
'coloured' or 'dark-coloured'
dark-coloured' (= kļşnacchavi or black-cloud ?).
praksti, C. i k 2.
296) vipaśyanā, T. Ihag-mthon, C. PL 1 (usually,
297) mülaviếuddhā prakſtiḥ, T. ran-bshin-gyis rnam-par dag-pa ni rsta-baḥo.
prakſtiviśuddham mūlam). But,“ prakrti ’ here stands for cittaprakſti. C. om. from
mūla’ to 'parikalpāḥ kleśāḥ ’.
298) The reading “bali yo' in the text should be corrected into “ baliyo’ (compara-
tive degree).
299) anupacayo "napacayo. C.
TH...TIE
(neither composing nor scattering
himself). T. om. anupacaya' (for anapacaya, hgrib-pa med-pa).
seems to mean
295) P
(usually, L.
[ 239 ]



J. TAKASAKI
303).
304)
royed and is stable with its own essence 300). [On the contrary),
these three gross elements (other than space) are possessed of ori-
gination and destruction, unstable 301) and of no long duration 302).
It will be perceived that these three gross elements are changeable,
but space is by no means changeable “In a similar manner
all the component elements [of the Phenomenal Life classified into]
5 elementary groups, 18 component elements, or 12 bases of co-
gnition have their support in the Active Force and Defilements.
The Active Force and Defilements are founded on the Irrational
Thought and the latter has its support in the Innate Pure Mind.
Therefore, it is said: the Mind is radiant by nature, but it]is
polluted by the occasional defilements 305) ”
After this passage, it is continued as follows 306) :
“Now, all these phenomena, the Irrational Thought, the Active
800)
svarasa-yogena, T. raň-gi nan-gis, C. #. (rasa dharmatā, nature).
301) anavasthita, T. mi-gnas-pa, C. HE TWP (= abhūtadharmā ?).
302) acirasthāyin, T. yun rin-du mi-gnas-pa, c. #l] # 7.
303) C. adds anitya and nitya after vikāra and avikāra, respectively. (Most probably
for arranging the style of the Chinese sentence).
304) Hereafter, the Skt, text has no vocative case (mārşāḥ), and the style looks as the
commentator's own explanation. But, from the context and C. which mentions' mār-
şāḥ' or ' kulaputrā' between sentences, the quotation seems still to be continuing.
305) T. "na klisyate' (ñon ma mons-paḥo).
This sermon has its origin in Pāli canon (e.g. AN I, 5, 9-10; IV, 1-2). But it seems
that not all the Buddhist schools accepted it. The Mahāvibhāṣāśāstra of Sarvāstivādin,
who did not accept this cittaprakſti theory, mentions it as an opinion of the Vibhajya-
vādin (
GR), saying :, nË tih , k 5 A,
BRU #P, ET TA HIT , IT
(Someone, like the Vibhajyavādin, has the opinion of visuddhi cittaprakſti. They say
that the mind is pure by nature, but, being polluted by accidental defilements, its feature
is impure) (Taisho, XVIIX, p. 140 b). See also is BO MILA (Säriputrábhidhar-
maśāstra ?) (Taisho, XXVIII, p. 697 b), where this theory is attributed to the Vātsīputrīya.
It is clear that T. interpretation has no foundation in the sūtras as far as its literal
cerned, but we have an example of the same interpretation as T. in the Mahā.
prajñāpāramitāśāstra t) attributed to Nāgārjuna, saying:
DU
# TEETH FT (Taisho, XXV, p. 204 a). So there
seem to be two ways of interpretation with respect to pollution', namely whether or
not cittaprakſti can be polluted.
306 The reading . tatra paścād' is somewhat doubtful. T. has simply de-la (tatra).
C. om. the whole.
[ 240 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
Force and Defilements, and all of the component elements of the
Phenomenal Life are originated by the complex of their causes
and conditions. When these causes and conditions lose their
complexity 307) they are immediately extinguished. On the con-
trary, the Innate Mind is of no cause nor condition. Consequently,
it has no complex [of cause and condition] and hence there is nei-
ther origination nor destruction of it. Here, the Innate Mind is
like space, the Irrational Thought is like air, the Active Force and
Defilements are like water and all of the component elements of the
Phenomenal Life are akin to earth. Therefore, it is said:, all
phenomena are completely devoid of any root 308) and based upon
an unreal and unstable foundation, [because they are of unreal
nature, but at the same time) they are founded on a pure [essence]
which is, in its turn, of no root”.
§ 2. Indestructible Character of the Innate Mind.
We have already explained that in the impure state the Innate
Mind has a resemblance to space on account of its unchangeable
(avikāra) characteristic; the Irrational Thought and the Active Force
and Defilements, being founded on the Innate Mind, have a resemblance
to air and water, respectively, on account of their characteristic of 'cause?
(hetu), and [lastly] all of the Component Elements of Phenomenal Life,
being produced from the former two, have a resemblance to the earth on
account of their characteristic of' fruit' (vipāka). We have not, however,
discussed the similarity of the fires' of death, illness and decrepitude to
the
gross element of fire as being the cause of the annihilation of Life 309)
and on account of their characteristic of being “infection ’ 310).
So, on
this point it is said as follows:
The three fires, the fire at the end of the world,
307) visāmagri (losing complexity), T. [dan] bral, c. fin
308) mūlaparicchinna (which is to be inserted acc. to Ms. B., as well as T.), T. rtsa-
ba yons-su chad-pa, c. The TR *. The whole saying is as follows: sarvadharmā
mūlaparicchinnā asāramālā apratisthānamūlāḥ śuddhamūlā amūlamūlā iti Cf. AAS 496 b.
309) vibhava, T. hjig-pa, c. ** (an analogical translation).
upasarga, T. mgoủi nad, c. ; (calamity). Three aspects of vikāra ' in
the Phenomenal World are named here ‘hetu', vipāka' and 'upasarga', and all of
these stand for the counterpart of .avikāritva’ of cittaprakſti or tathāgatadhātu.
310)
[ 241 ]



J. TAKASAKI
The fire of hell and the ordinary 311) fire,
These are to be known respectively as the analogy
For three fires, that of death, of sickness and old age. || 65 ||
The similarity of death, illness and old age to fire should be known
for three reasons, respectively. [Which are the three reasons ? They are
namely]: 1) because [death] leads the 6 [internal] bases of cognition
to destruction 312); 2) [illness) makes sufferings of various kinds of tor-
ments 313); and 3) [old age) leads the Active Forces to their ripening 314).
Even by these fires, the Essence of the Tathāgata in its impure state
cannot be changed at all. With reference to this point, it is said [in the
Scripture) 315)
“O Lord, something is dead, something is born, such sayings are
merely a worldly usage 316). The saying something is dead', O Lord,
this means the destruction 317) of sense organs. Something is born
means, O Lord, origination 318) of new sense organs. However, 0
Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata is never born, never decays,
6
311) prākſta, T. tha-mal-ba, c. I u (fire made by human being).
312) nirmami-karaṇa (cause to destroy something conceived as “mine”), T. bdag-gi-ba
med-par byed-pa (bdag-gi-ba stands for mamatva). C. om. this phrase and regards
the other two as part of a verse.
313) vicitra-kāraṇânubhavana, T. sdug-bsnal sna-tshogs myon-bar byed-pa, C. RE
VE TE For kāraņā, T. & C. have ' duḥkha'. The word kāraņā (f.), being delivered
from Pāli kāraņa, has a sense of 'torture' or 'torment', “punishment’, and is often used
along with kſ, in the sense to make punishment, to make pain on somebody by torment '.
Cf. BHS Dic. p. 178, “kāraņa’; PTS Dic. II, 38 kāraṇā' I. (M. W. gives the
meaning ‘pain ’, which is picked up from Dasakumālacarita). Here in connection
with anu-bhū, we can easily find out the sense, to feel pain as a result of experiencing
torment,
314) samskāra-paripāka, which means the readiness for the next birth, repetition
of life in samsāra.
315) ŚMS 222 b.
316) lokavyavahāra, T. hjig-rten-gyi tha-sñad, c. If ). vyavahāra,
as the sanskritized form of Pli vohāra, has two senses, vyāhāra (speech) and vyavahāra
(behaviour), and mixing both, the sense 'usage’ is attached to the term vyavahāra. This
vyavahāra is also used as a synonym of 'samvíti' in connection with satya’. C. trans-
lation shows this meaning. Cf. Prof. P. V. Bapat, A Review of Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit
Dictionary, ABORI, XXXV, p. 235.
317) uparodha, T. hgags-pa (= nirodha), c. th.
318) prādurbhāva, T. thob-pa (= prāpti), c. .
6
[ 242 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
319)
never deceases, never passes away or arises (again). For what
reasons ? Because, O Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata, being bey-
ond the sphere characterized as being caused and conditioned, is
eternal, constant, quiescent and everlasting".
(B) Unchangeability in the Pure and Impure State
Now there comes one śloka referring to the meaning of 'unchangea-
bility' in the pure and impure state [of Bodhisattvas).
(Kārikā 24)
Having truly 320) realized the Innate Mind
As being released 321) from birth and death
As well as from illness and decrepitude,
The Bodhisattvas have no calamity 322) of birth and so forth;
Still, because of the rising of Compassions towards the world,
They assume the cause of calamities 323). || 66 ||
§ 1.
The Pure Character and Impure Character of the Bodhisattva.
What is shown by this bloka ?
The sufferings of death, illness and decrepitude
319)
6
enam
cyavate (< cyu), T. hpho-ba, C. St (to change, to move from one place (life) to
another place (life).
320) ananyathā, Т. ji-bshin-ñid, c. kp TV. ananyathā'vagamya = yathābhūtasya
darśanāt (v. 68).
321) The reading
-vimuktām’, instead of vimuktā', should be adopted. So C.
T. reading is not clear. Cf. S. v. I. 54 (na pradahanty enam mộtyuvyādijarāgnayaḥ,
cittaprakrtim).
vyasana, T. phons[-pa]. C. has #JE, for janmâdivyasana.
323) tan-nidānam ... bhajante. C. T EL # # (assume the existence of origi-
nation and destruction), T. de-yi rgyus for tan-nidānam, regarding this term as an adver-
bial use.
See BHS Dic. p. 295 (under “nidāna '): tan-nidānam, for that reason. Acc.
to C., however, nidāna seems to mean the existence (bhava) on which janman, etc. take
place.
322)
[ 243 ]
17



J. TAKASAKI
Are destroyed by the Saints to the root;
There is a birth by the power of Active Force and Defilements;
As there is no birth [of such a kind]
The saints have no root [of defilements). || 67 ||
Now, in the impure state, the causa materialis 324) of the fires of suffer-
ings 325) like death, illness and decrepitude is the Birth based upon the
Irrational Thought, the Active Force and Defilements, just as the fuel
[is the causa materialis of ordinary fires). In the pure and impure
state, however, there is no appearance 326) whatever of such a cause that
we can know of; there is also no flame of fires of suffering at all in the
Bodhisattvas who have attained the Body made of mind.
They, being full of mercy, make appearance
Of birth, death, decrepitude and illness,
Though they have got rid of 327) birth, etc.
Because of their perception of the truth. // 68 //
Indeed, because of their contact 328) with the virtuous root 329),
Bodhisattvas attach themselves 330) to the Phenomenal World consisting
of three spheres, basing themselves upon 331) the power of origination
by their will 332). Also they make appearance of birth, of old age, of
illness and of death. Still, there are in reality no such phenomena of
birth, etc. among them. Because 333), of course, they have truly percei-
ved that the Essence [of the Buddha) 334) is of no birth and of no ori-
gination 335).
(References to the Scriptures)
324) upādāna, T. ñe-bar len-pa, c. H ... * (= pūrvika).
325) T. om. duḥkha.
326) anābhāsa-gamana,
T. snan-bar med-par gyur-pa, C
C. Jie
327) vinivịtta T. Ảdas gyur, c. E.
328) samyojana (= samprayukta), T. kun-tu sbyor-ba, c. i. T. adds srid-pa
(bhava) before samyojana.
329) kuſala-müla, T. dge-baħi rtsa-ba, c. *FR.
330) samyśliş T. yan-dag-par sbyor[-ba], C. EL (to make appearance).
331) The form samniḥśraya for samniśraya is notable.
332) samcintya (ind.), T. bsams-bshin-du, C. At U.
333) yathāpi is omitted in T.
334) dhātu, T. khams, c. I. kpt.
335) Instead of ajāty-anutpatti, C. has anutpatty-anirodha.
[ 244 )



The Ratna gotra vibhā g a
§ 2. Defilements endowed with Virtuous Root.
They
And this state of Bodhisattvas is to be understood in detail according
to the Scripture. It is said 336):
" Which are the Defilements endowed with virtuous root 337) that
cause [Bodhisattvas) to reside in the Phenomenal World ?
are namely: Non-satisfaction 338) in searching for the accumula-
tion of merits 339); Acceptance 340) of existence through origination
by their own will; The earnest wish to meet with 341) the Buddhas;
Unweariness towards the perfect maturity 342) of living beings.
Efforts for the perfect apprehension 343) of the sublime Doctrine 344);
Endeavour 345) after works to be done 346) for the living beings;
Non-abandonment of propensity 347) of desire for phenomena; Non-
reluctance from fetters 348) of the Highest Virtues. O Sāgaramati,
thus are the Defilements endowed with the virtuous roots by which
the Bodhisattvas attach themselves [to this world], but they are
never affected by the fault of Defilements. Then [Sāgaramati]
asked: Why then, O Lord, are the virtuous roots called “Defile-
ments'? ... [The Lord) answered: Because, O Sāgaramati, by these
Defilements of such kinds Bodhisattvas attach themselves to the
Phenomenal World. And this Phenomenal World is of origination
336) The Sāgaramati-pariprcchā. C. * # # Fi.
(Taisho, XIII, p. 46–74); # F H #EPENI (tr. by 'ME A
of Suang. Taisho, No. 400). This passage is in Taisho, XIII, p. 68 a, b, but quite
simplified.
237) ku salamūla-samprayuktā kleśāh, c. * TR PER TE
338) atrptatā, T. mi-roms-pa, C. SHE F E.
339) punya-sambhāra, T. bsod-nams-kyi tshogs, c. * (ku salamülāni).
340) parigraha, T. yoňs-su hdsin-pa, c. I.
341) samavadhāna, T. phrad-pa, C. L. See S. p. 13, 1. 18.
342) paripāka, T. yońs-su smin-pa, c. tt TŁ.
343) parigraha. T. & C., the same as above (Note 340).
341) saddharma, T. dam-pași, chos, C. 1 tJ top 10 truby
345) kimkaraņiya, T. bya-ba ci-yod-pa. C. U is implying the sense, for
the living beings '.
346) utsukatā, T. hgrus-pa, C.
C. O PE...
347) anusaya, T. bsam-pa (intention), c. ii.
348) samyojana.
[ 245 ]



J. TAKASAKI
from Defilements. There, to this very Phenomenal World, Bodhi-
sattvas attach themselves at their own wishes by their skill of
means 349) and through producing 350) the power of virtuous roots.
Therefore, it is called “Defilements endowed with the roots of vir-
tuous qualities. [It is called so) inasmuch as they attach themsel-
ves to the Phenomenal World, but not because of [actual] defile-
ments on the mind”.
§ 3. Bodhisattvas’ Compassion. The parable of a Householder.
“For example 351), O Sāgaramati, suppose there were an only
son of some distinguished person or 352) householder. Suppose he
were beloved, handsome, affectionate 353) quite agreeable in his
appearance 354). Now suppose this boy, being a child, would fall
into a pit of night-soil while playing. Thereupon the mother and
relatives 355) of this boy would see him fall into the impure pit. Upon
seeing this they would deeply sigh, lament and would cry out. They
could not, however, take the boy out 356) by entering into the pit.
After that the boy's father would come to that place, and would
see his only son fallen in the pit of night-soil. Upon seeing
that sight, he being affected by the intention to pull out his
only son 357),
340) upāya-kausalya, T. thabs-la mkhas-pa, c. ti etj.
350) anvādhāna, T. skyed-pa, C. om.
351) Continuation from § 2 (quotation from the same Sūtra). This parable is also
found in AĀS (470 a-b).
852) Both T. & C. insert a word for 'vā'. So “ śreștiņo vā gļhapater vā' would be
a better reading.
353) manāpa (BHS), T. yid-du hon-ba, C. & i. (For the previous three, C. simply
te).
354) apratikūlo darśanena (lit. not disagreeable), T. mthon-na mi-sdug-pa med-pa,
C. 見者歡喜, After darśanena, there should be a Danda.
355) C. inserts “pitā’, but it is not the case.
356) adhyālambati (BHS), T. ḥdon-pa (pulls out), C. &.
357) The reading “ekaputrakâdhyāśaya-premânunita' is doubtful as J said. This
translation is according to T., which reads bu gcig-po ḥdon-par ķdod-paḥi sred-pas
byas'. The word “ḥdon-pa’ is used in the preceding sentence for 'adhyālamba', and for
abhyutksepa’in S. p. 48, 1. 8, in the sense of 'taking out, pulling out '. But C. seems
to omit this word and reads:
生一子想生愛念心
(having ekaputraka-
6
[ 246 ]



The Rat nag otra vibhāga
out
would hurry to enter the pit with full speed without any feeling
of disgust, and would take
358) his only son. O Sāgaramati,
this example was made in order to make known a special meaning.
Which relation 359) should be known [between illustrations and illus-
trated meaning]? O Sāgamarati, “a pit of night-soil' is a name
for the Phenomenal Life. “An only son ’ is a name for the living
beings, because Bodhisattvas have a notion of the only son towards
all living beings. Mother and relatives’ is a name for those
people who belong to the Vehicles of Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha,
since they, having seen the living beings fallen into the world of
transmigration, are distressed and lament, but have no capacity
to rescue [the living beings]. The distinguished person or
the householder' is a name for the Bodhisattva who is pure, unpol-
luted, of unpolluted mind, has attained the direct perception of the
immutable Absolute 361), but still, in order to bring living beings
to the maturity, connects himself 362) to the Phenomenal World
by his own will. O Sāgaramati, such is the Great Compassion of
the Bodhisattva that, being perfectly free from all bondages,
he again assumes 363) the origination into Existence. Being pos-
sessed of the skill of means and the Transcendental Intellect, he
is never affected by impurities; and, in order to extirpate all the
bondage of Defilements from the living beings, he preaches the
Doctrine"
360)
By this explanation of words in the Scripture 364), there is explained
the
pure and impure state of Bodhisattvas who have the Controlling Power
through two points: [namely] the Bodhisattva attaches himself at his will
to the origination in the world, for the sake of others, by the powers of
virtuous roots and Compassion, but, at the same time, he is not polluted
by the world owing to the powers of means and the Intellect.
samjñā and premâdhyāsaya). Cf. AĀS T U T. (Instead of anunīta ', 'adhy-
ālambanataḥ’ would be preferable to accept).
358) abhy-ut V kşip, T. phyun-ba, C. &.
358) prabandha, T. don, C. (artha).
360) S. om, vā, but T. & C. have it.
361) asamskȚta-dharma. T. as S., but c. SE EI RE (dharmadhātu).
362) pratisam V dhā, T. mtshams sbyor-ba, C. EU.
len-pa, c. 30 .
364) C. regards this passage as a quotation from the same Sūtra (SāgP.). T. om.
nirdeśa. For pada, T. dum-bu.
363)
upa V dā,
[ 247 ]



J. TAKASAKI
§ 4. Bodhisattva’s Perception on the Pure Mind.
as
Now, when a Bodhisattva has attained the correct perception of the
Essence of the Tathāgata as being of no birth, no origination, then
he can obtain this essential quality 365) a Bodhisattva. This point
should be understood in detail 366) according to the [same] Scripture. It
is said:
"O Sāgaramati, perceive that separate elements are of no real essen-
ce, of no creator, of no substance, non-existence, lifeless, of no
personality and of no owner 367) ! Indeed, these elements are illu-
sorily created 368) according to desire. As being 369) illusorily crea-
ted, they cannot cause [one) to think or to imagine 370). Believing
in the fact that separate elements are created illusorily O Sā-
garamati, the Bodhisattva does never produce the feeling of dis-
gust for any phenomenon. He will be possessed of the pure and
immaculate perception based upon the Wisdom that there is noth-
ing which causes benefit or harm 372). Thus, he knows correctly the
essential nature 373) of
separate elements.
And thus he does never
cast off the armour 374) of the Great Compassion 375).
O Sāgaramati, suppose there were an invaluable 376) Vaidūrya
stone, well polished, well purified, well cleaned. Suppose it might
be thrown into mud and would remain there for a thousand years 377).
371)
.
365) dharmatā, T. chos-ñid, c. IH
PA.
366). T. om. vistareņa. c. dt 1 * L aj to Si e (this word of the
Sūtra has already been taught), and starts the next quotation with the parable of the
Vaiļūrya stone. The quotation is from SāgP. 68 a. Cf. AĀS 469 b-c.
367) asvāmikatā, T. bdag med-pa-ñid. For nirātmatā, T. bdag-po med-pa-ñid.
368) vițhapyante (pass. 3. p. of caus. of vi V sthā, a hybrid form. Cf. BHS Dic. s.v.).
T. om. tathā vithapyante vițhapitāś ca samānā”.
369) samāna (= sat, after adjective) (Pāli, the same). Cf. BHS Dic, s. V.
370) prakalpayati, T. rab-tu rtogs-par byed.
3a) dharma-vithapanā. T. gshan-du mi-hgyur-baủi chos (ananyathābhāvadharma)
is probably caused by a misunderstanding of the term dharma. After all, T. offers no
help to fix the meaning of “vițhapyate'.
372) upakaro Đã “pakaro vã, T. pham-hdogs-paham gnod-par byed-pa.
373) dharmatā.
374) samnāha, T.
up
to here.
876) anargha, T. rin than-pa (mahārgha), C. FEM.
377) Cf. SāgP.: hundred years '. (But the second Chinese translation of the SāgP.
has thousand years ').
go-cha.
375) C. om.
[ 248 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
.
C
After the passing of a thousand years [in mud), this stone would
be drawn out from mud and would be washed 378) and cleaned. As
being washed well, perfectly cleaned and polished, it would never
abandon its nature of jewel, pure and immaculate. In the same
way, O Sāgaramati, the Bodhisattva knows the innate radiant
nature of the mind of living beings. He perceives also that the
same mind is defiled by the accidental defilements. Then the
Bodhisattva thinks as follows: These defilements would never
penetrate into the radiant Innate Mind of the living beings. Being
accidental, these defilements are the production of unreal, wrong
discrimination. I can teach the Doctrine for the sake of these
living beings in order to remove their accidental 379) defilements.
Thus, he never has his mind demoralized 380) and, with great inten-
sity, he gives rise to the intention towards liberation 381) in the
case of 382) living beings. Again he thinks as follows: These
defilements have no power and ability. They are powerless, of
weak power. They have no real foundation at all. These defi-
lements are [produced] by incorrect discrimination. These defi-
lements, when they are inspected by the real and correct percep-
tion 383), cannot be excited 384) by any means. They should be
investigated by us so that they might not contaminate again. Inde-
ed, it is a good thing not to be contaminated by defilements, not
a good thing to be contaminated 385). If I were contaminated by
378) lodyeta (caus. opt. of V lud), T. sbyar-ba, C. Ukist.
379) T. om. āgantuka and instead has upaklesa.
This passage (S. p. 49, 1. 9—p. 50, 1. 7) is quoted in Paramārtha's translation of the
Mahāyānasamgraha-bhāșya as from AĀS. (MSbh (P) 259 c-260 a). It is notable that
Paramārtha's translation is, though abbreviated, rather closer to the Ratna.
passage
than to AĀS, which has, in turn, insertions equivalent to other passages of the Ratna.
(S. p. 78, l1. 17–20; p. 45, 11. 3–9).
380) avaliyanā, T. shum-pa, C. 5 timid). Probably from Páli oliyanā (Skt.
avaliyana ?) Cf. BHS Dic. s. v. avaliyate, anavaliyanatā, etc.
381) pramokşa-citta, T. rab-tu hbro-ba (but it should be -hgrol-ba), C. A.
382) -antike, T. thad-tu, C. A.
383) yathābhūta-yoniśomanasikāra, T. ji–lta-ba-bshin-du tshul-bshin-du yid-la byed-
pa, C. JE L.
384) na kupyanti, c. TRE 10 e (cannot rise).
385) C. om. “ na punaḥ śleşah , and for the former part, has DI
TT ME
[ 249 ]



J. TAKASAKI
defilements, how could I teach the Doctrine for the sake of the
living beings who are bound by the bondages of defilements, in
order to remove these bondages of defilements ? Oh ! really, we
are not attached to defilements; therefore, we shall teach the
Doctrine to the living beings in order to remove the bondage of
defilements. And moreover, in order to bring the living beings to
their maturity, we should be attached to the defilements 386), by
which we are bound to the world of transmigration, which are at the
same time endowed with the roots of virtues ".
§ 5.
Samsāra' in the Case of Bodhisattva.
And here, the expression “World of transmigration' (samsāra) impli-
es the three kinds of Body made of mind in the Immaculate Sphere, being
an image similar to that 387) in the Phenomenal World. Indeed, it is the World
of Transmigration because it is manifested 388) under the influence of
immaculate roots of virtue. At the same time, it is the Nirvāṇa because
it is not manifested under the influence of the passionate Active Force
and Defilements. With regard to this point, it is said 389):
Therefore, O Lord, there is the Phenomenal World, conditioned
as well as unconditioned. There is the Nirvāṇa, conditioned as
well as unconditioned ”.
Here, being endowed with the manifestation of mind and mental
states 390) mixing 391) both, the conditioned and the unconditioned, this
is called the
pure and impure state ’.
6
§ 6. Bodhisattva in His 6th Stage.
And this state is predominantly established in the 6th Stage of Bod-
hisattva called Abhimukhi (ready for the Enlightenment) 392). Because,
386) C. inserts JEE IT (to practise pāramitās).
387) -pratibimbaka, T. gzugs-brñan-yid, C. I TU TE
388) abhisamskrta, c. HIT ME. T. as usual.
389) ŚMS 221 b.
390) citta-caitasika, C. UU. T. om. citta.
391) samślişta, T. ḥdres-pa, C. om.
392) T. mnon-du gyur-pa, C
C.
*... EL SI (AL).
[ 250 ]



The Rat na gotra vibhā g a
[in this Stage), the Bodhisattva, facing the acquisition 393) of the Extinc-
tion of Evil Influences 394) through his practices of unobstructed Highest
Intellect and the Great Compassion 395), still does never realize that ac-
quisition in order to protect all living beings 396).
With reference to this Wisdom for the Extinction of Evil Influences,
there is an illustration of a castle 397) in the Scripture.
It runs as follows: (... omission)
398)
393) -abhimukhi, T. mnon-du phyogs-pa, c. 1 DELU.
394) The word abhijñā in both S. & T. is better omitted. C. om. it and instead
has moksa.
395) C. regards mahākaruņā-bhāvanayā as being connected with asākṣātkaraņa.
396) sattvadhātu, T. as usual, c. .
397) T. (D) has mi(= nara) instead of nagara. But it is not the case.
398) The Ratnacūda-pariprcchā (c. is a mistake for
H1). Chi-
nese Tripitaka retains two versions of this Sūtra, namely 1) * tot,
寶警菩薩品第十
(Mahāsamnipātasūtra, Chap. 11. Ratnacūdabodhi-
sattva-parivarta), Taisho, XIII, p. 173–184; 2) * H VU + ŁA
(Mahāratnakūțasūtra, 47th Parişat) (originally called me
bf H, Ratnacūờabodhisattva-paripịcchā), Taisho, XI, No. 310 (47). The
illustration of a castle is available only in C., but probably S. & T. have a lacuna
here. According to C., the illustration is as follows:
Suppose, O noble youth, there were a castle of one square yojana, which has
many gates, but the path towards its gates were steep and dark, and full of dangers.
However, the people who could enter this castle were enjoying a lot of pleasure. Suppose
again there were one person who had an only son and loved him. Having heard of the
pleasure within the castle, he wanted to enter that castle leaving his son behind. By
skilful means, he could pass over the steep path and reach a gate of the castle. But when
he stepped inside with one leg, the other leg remaining outside, he would remember
his son and think: Why hadn't I accompanied my only son! Who could nourish him and
let him get rid of suffering? And rejecting the pleasure in the castle, he would go back
to his only son. O noble youth, the Bodhisattva is also like him. For the sake of the people,
he accumulated the 5 abhijñās. Having accumulated them and being ready for the acqui-
ring of āsravakşaya, he does never realize the Enlightenment. Why? Because, due to
his compassion towards living beings, he, without making use of his abhijñā for āsravak-
şaya, does act among the world of ordinary beings. Here, 0 noble youth, 'a castle' is the
parable for mahāparinirvāņa; “many gates' are for the gates of samādhi, 80 thausand in
number; “the steep path' is for the various actions of demons; "to reach the gate of the
castle’ is for [the attainment of] 5 abhijñās; 'stepped inside with one leg ’ is for [the
attainment of] the Wisdom; "the other leg remained outside’ is for the Bodhisattva's
non-realization of mokşa; “ the only son’ is for all living beings wandering in 5 paths
(gati): ‘to remember his son' is for the Great Compassion; and to go back to his son' is
the parable for [the Bodhisattva's] leading of living beings. "Though having the capacity
of attaining the Liberation, he does never realize it ’... this is due to (the Bodhisattva's]
[ 251 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Thus, through the origination of the Great Intention [towards the
Nirvāṇa) 399) by great efforts and exertion, the Bodhisattva gives rise to
the 5 Supernatural Faculties. Having the mind purified 400) by the con-
templation and Supernatural faculties, he becomes ready for the Extinc-
tion of Evil Influences. Having cultivated 401) the Wisdom for the Ex-
tinction of Evil Influences in order to rescue all living beings through the
origination of the mind of Compassion, he, with perfectly purified mind 402),
produces the unobstructed Intellect in the 6th Stage and again becomes
ready for the Extinction of Evil Influences. In this way is explained
the pure state of the Bodhisattva who has obtained the power for
realization of the Extinction of Evil Influences in the [6th] Stage of the
Bodhisattva named Abhimukhī. [On the other hand], he, though having
practised 403) correctly for his own sake, still wishes to save the living
beings who are ori the wrong way 404), owing to the Great Compassion, saying:
I will lead the others also to this true practice 405). While cultivating
the means for the bliss of the Quiescence, but not in order to taste it [by
himself] 406) he turns his face 407) away from Nirvāṇa, for the sake of the
living beings who are facing the world of transmigration. Though abiding
[in the desireless World of Form] with [4 kinds of] contemplations
in order to accomplish the factors for the acquisition of Enlightenment
408)
409)
skilful means (upāya). Thus, 0 noble youth, the Great Mercy and Compassion of the
Bodhisattva is inconceivable”. (Cf. RCP, Taisho, XIII, p. 181 a).
The following passage is actually not a quotation, and the word “kulaputra' (S.,
T. & C.) is probably an excess. I ventured to omit this vocative word in this translation
and treated the whole passage as an explanation by the commentator.
309) drdhâdhyāśaya, T. lhag-paại bsam-pa brtan-pa, c. 1. T. reads as
drdhâdhyāśaya-pratipattyā', which seems better.
400) parikarma-krta, T. yons-su sbyon-ba byas-pa (parisuddha-krta), C. om.
401) parijayam kṛtvā. For parijaya, T. yońs-su sbyon-ba, C. unclear.
402) suparikarmakrtacetāḥ. C. *LIT. C. inserts an explanation on the
attainment of the 4th and 5th Stages (bhūmi) here.
403) [samyak-1prati panna, T. (yan-dag-par) shugs-pa (to enter), C. (EJ VLEE FT.
401) vipratipanna, T. log-par shugs-pa, c. UT 11.
405) samyakpratipatti, T. yan-dag-par rtogs-pa, C. not clear.
406) anāsvādana, T. ro mi-myan-ba, c.
T.
407) vimukha.
But both T. & C. read as abhimukhasya.
408) (catur)dhyāna, T. bsam-gtan dag (pl.), c. DU T. It is said that by the
practice of these four dhyānas, one can be born in the World of Form (rūpa-dhātu).
409) bodhyanga, T. byan-chub-kyi yan-lag, c. 5. T
They are said to be 7
in number.
[ 252 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
he voluntarily assumes 410) again the existence in the World of Desire
and wishes to work for the sake of living beings as quickly as pos-
sible 411). [Thus) he has obtained the power for manifesting the body
of ordinary beings by assu
suming various births [even) in the form of ani-
mals. From these points mentioned above his state is explained as
perfectly pure.
not
§ 7. The Pure and Impure State of the Bodhisattva in comparison with
the Ordinary Being and the Buddha.
(Another interpretation of the verse 66) 112).
There is another meaning of the śloka (Kārikā 24, v. 66).
The son of the Buddha, though having understood 413) that
This Absolute Essence is unchangeable,
Is still perceived by the ignorant
In the appearances of birth, etc.:-
This is really wonderful! || 69 ||
Having attained the position of the Saints 414),
He is nevertheless seen among ordinary beings;
Therefore, he is, for the friends of all the world,
The Highest Means and Compassion. // 70 //
Being superior to all kinds of worlds,
He is nevertheless not apart from the world,
He acts in the world for the sake of the world
Without being affected by the worldly pollution. // 71 //
Just as a lotus flower growing in the water
Is not polluted by the latter,
Similarly, though having been born in the world
He is never polluted by worldly matters. /| 72 ||
His intelligence is always burning like fire
For bringing about the welfare 415) [to the world];
411) C. om.
410) parigrahaņa, T. yonis-su ḥdsin-pa, C. 30 #.
yāvad āśu'.
412) C. om. the whole of the following paragraph, which is therefore probably
a later insertion. The heading “aparaḥ ślokârthaḥ’ also supports this suggestion.
413) The reading pratividhya (Ms. B, as Chawdhuri noted) would be better than pra-
tivicya in the text. See S. p. 52, 1. 19: dharmatā-prativedhāt. Cf. BHS Dic.: ' pratividhyati'
(Pāli pațivijjhati). T. rtogs-nas (having understood).
414) ārya-gocara.
(gocara = caryāvișaya).
415) krtya-sampādana, T. bya-ba sgrub.
[ 253 ]



J. TAKASAKI
416)
At the same time, he is always practising
Meditation and concentration on the Quiescence 417); // 73 //
Owing to the continuing force 418) of the previous life,
And because of being free from all discriminations,
He does not use any exertion at all
For bringing the living beings to their maturity. || 74 ||
The Bodhisattva, knowing who is to be trained
In what manner and by what means
[Performs it] in the proper manner:
By means of teaching, of two apparitional forms 419)
By conduct [of ordinary life) or by religious observances 420). // 75 //
In such a way, he does always,
With no effort and with unobstructed Wisdom,
Bring benefits for the living beings
Among the world, limitless 421) like the sky. || 76 ||
Having obtained this position 422),
The Bodhisattva becomes equal to the Tathāgata
On account of his act of conveying 423) the living beings
In various worlds, to the other shore. || 77 ||
There is however a great difference
Between Bodhisattvas and the Buddha,
Such difference as lies between the atom and the earth,
Or in [the water) in a foot-print of a bull 424) and in the ocean. // 78||
Of these ten verses taken respectively, (the first] 9 verses refer to
the comparison [of the state of Bodhisattva) with the absolute impurity
of those who rank below the lst Stage of Bodhisattva named Pramuditā
416) pratipanna, T. sñoms-par shugs-pa.
417) This and the following 5 verses (vv. 74–78) were quoted in Amſtākara's Țika
on the Catuḥśubha of Nāgārjuna, of which a Sanskrit Ms. was found by Prof. G. Tucci,
and is edited along with the Tibetan version by him. (Minor Buddhist Works, II
pp. 236-246, ISMEO, Rome, 1958).
418) ävedha, T. ḥphen-pa (= ākṣipta). 'pūrvâvedhavaśāt' or pūrvâvedhāt' is the
usual form. See BHS Dic. p. 109, āvedha (2).
419) For deśanyā rūpakāyābhyām, Amộtākara's quotation reads deśanā-rūpakā-
yābhyām. But T. bstan dan gzugs-sku dag dan ni, which suggests two rūpakāyas (i.e.
sambhoga-k, & nirmāņa-k). deśani is a rare form.
420) Tryā-patha, T. sbyod-lam.
421)
-paryanta, T. mthaḥ klas (ananta).
422) For gati, T. tshul (=naya).
423) samtāraṇa, T. yan-dag sgrol-ba.
424) gospada (BHS. gospada in Skt.).
( 254 )



The Ratnago tra vibhāga
(Joy) 425), and the 10th verse refers to the comparison with the supreme
purity of the Stage above the [10th] Stage of Bodhisattva named Dhar-
mameghā (Cloud of Doctrine) 426) (i.e. the Stage of the Buddha). [In
comparison with the states, both below and above], there is explained
in brief the purity and impurity of the four kinds of Bodhisattvas in
the 10 Stages of Bodhisattva. The four kinds of Bodhisattvas are as
follows: 1) He who has resolved upon the acquisition for the first time
(prathamacittôtpādika); 2) He who is practising the way towards the
acquisition (caryāpratipanna); 3) He who has ascended the irreversible
stage (avaivartika), and; 4) He who is expected to be the Buddha in the
next birth (ekajātipratibaddha) 427).
Here, by the first and second verses, there are explained the pure
characteristics of qualities 428) of the Bodhisattva who is abiding on the
Stage of Pramuditā resolving upon the acquisition for the first time, because
[in this stage] he has understood 429) the highest supermundane Essence
which had never been seen before since beginningless time. By the third
and the fourth verses, there are explained the pure characteristics of quali-
ties of the Bodhisattva who is practising the way to the acquisition in the
Stages beginning with (the 2nd named] Vimalā 430) up to [the 7th named]
Dūramgamā (Far-Going) 431) because [in these stages] he practises the
unpolluted practices. By the 5th verse, there are explained the pure cha-
racteristics of qualities of the Bodhisattva who has got the irreversible
425) T. rab-tu dgah-ba (c. # .
426) T. chos-kyi sprin (c. £ EU).
427) T. 1) sems dan-po bskyed-pa (c. 17 »); 2) spyod-pa-la shugs-pa
(C. IT ); 3) phyir mi-ldog-pa; (C. Tib 0); 4) skye-ba gcig-gis thogs-pa (C.
to it). Of these four, the first one is said to be equivalent to darśanamārga and
the second bhāvanāmārga. From the point of wiew of the development of the bhūmi
theory, these four stages are regarded as older than the 10-bhūmis theory of the Daśa
bhūmikā. The combination of these 4 groups with the 10-bhūmis seems to be the latest
development, but how to combine both sets is not determined. Often these four are iden-
tified with the first, the 3rd, the 7th and the 10th of the 10 vihāras (c. + ),
pectively.
428) The reading “gaņa’ in the text is corrected into 'guņa ', in comparison with
the following three examples. T. also has ‘ yon-tan’. For viśuddhi, T. yońs-su dag-pa
(parisuddhi).
429) prativedha (BHS for Skt. prati V vyadh), T. mthon-baủi phyir (darśanāt for pra-
tivedhāt).
430) T. dri-ma med-pa (C. nje HL).
431) T. instead has mi-gyo-ba (acalā, the 8th Stage). This is probably a mistake.
res-
[ 255 ]



J. TAKASAKI
state in the [8th] Stage named Acalā (Immovable), because [in this stage]
be has firmly stood in the meditation as the practice immediately con-
nected with the acquisition of the Great Enlightenment. By the 6th, 7th
and 8th verses, there are explained the pure characteristics of qualities of the
Bodhisattva who is abiding on the 10th Stage named Dharmameghā, be-
ing expected to be the Buddha in the next birth, because [in this last stage)
he, having attained the ultimate point of means for fulfilling all the bene-
fits for his own as well as for others, is connected with the Stage of the Bud-
dha by one and the last birth 432) on account of the acquisition of the
Supreme Perfect Enlightenment. By the 9th and 10th verses, there are
explained the equality and difference between the purity of qualities of
the Bodhisattva who has reached the ultimate point with regard to the
aim of others and of his own, and that of the Buddha's qualities.
(C) Unchangeability in the Perfectly Pure State.
Now, we have one śloka with reference to the meaning of ' unchange-
ability' in the perfectly pure state [of the Buddha).
(Kārikā 25)
This [Essence of the Buddha) is of unalterable nature 433)
Because it is endowed with inexhaustible properties,
It is the refuge of the world
Because it has no limit in the future 434)
It is always non-dual
Because it is indiscriminative,
Also it is of undestructible nature
Because its own nature is not created [by conditions) 435). || 79 ||
2
What is shown by this śloka ?
It is not born, nor does it die;
It does not suffer [from illness), nor is it decrepit.
Because it is eternal,
438)
482) buddhabhūmy-ekacarama-janma-pratibaddha.
ananyathậtmā, T. gshan-hgyur-min-bdag, c. T . See v. 66.
484) anaparântakoți, T. phyi-maḥi mthah-med myur-thug, C. SHE .
135) For v. 79 d. c. 7, TPE , which is difficult
to be identified with S.
[ 256 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
Everlasting, quiescent and costant 436). // 80 //
Being eternal, it is not born
Even with [the form of] the Body made of mind 437)
Being everlasting, it does not die
Even with the Inconceivable Transformation. || 81 ||
Being quiescent, it has no suffering
From the illness of subtle defiling forces,
And, being constant, it does not become decrepit
By the accumulation of the Passionless Active Force 438). // 82 ||
Indeed, this Essence of the Tathāgata, in case it is abiding on the
Stage of the Buddha which is absolutely immaculate, pure and radiant
by its own nature, is ' eternal' in regard to its beginning. Therefore,
it is never born even in the form of Body made of mind. Being' ever-
lasting' in regard to its end, it does not die in the manner of the inconcei-
vable Transformation. Being quiescent’ in regard to both, beginning
and end, it never suffers from illness depending on 439) the Dwelling Place
of Ignorance. Thus, not falling into misery 440), it is constant ’, and
consequently never becomes decrepit through the transformation brought
about by the Passionless Active Force.
Here, the meaning of Eternity, etc.
In regard to the immutable Sphere 441)
Is to be known, respectively,
By each couple of terms. || 83 ||
437)
436) These 4 terms are as follows: 1) nitya, T. rtag-pa,
c. ; 2) dhruva, T. brten-pa,
C. ME;
; 3) siva, T. shi-ba, C. ; 4
4) śāśvata, T. gyun-drun, C.
Title
manomayakāya, etc. are of Bodhisattvas and don't belong to the Buddha.
Because of the birth in the form of manomayakāya and others, Bodhisattvas are regarded
as “partly impure’.
438) Cf. DAŚ 892 b: (under the item l. phala of bodhicitta) ME 7 H * E *
滅盡一切微細煩惱執故於中無生永復不生意生
諸蘊故,無老,此功德增上殊勝圓滿究竟無變異故,
無死永捨離不思議變易死故,無病一切煩惱所知
障病及與習氣皆永斷故,
parigraha, T. yońs-su hdsin-pa, C.
Ff the (parigțhita).
440) anartha, T. don-med-pa, c. = H (=the world of transmigration). anarthā-
patita is to be resolved into anartha-apatita. For apatita, T. ma thog-pa, c. T .
441) asamskſta-pada, T. ḥdus-ma-byas-kyi dbyins, C. THE (anāsrava-).
(asamskſtadhātu in the prose comm.).
438) pa
[ 257 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Of these four terms, namely “ eternal', “everlasting ’, quiescent'
and constant ’, the distinction of the meaning of each term in regard of
the Immutable Sphere is to be understood by each couple of terms show-
ing statement' and explanation ? 442), respectively, according to the
Scripture 443). It is said as follows:
“ This Absolute Body, O Sāriputra, is Eternal since it is of un-
alterable nature through its inexhaustible properties. This Ab-
solute Body, O Śāriputra, is Everlasting, the everlasting refuge,
because it exists as far as the farthest limit. Being of indiscrimi-
native nature, O Śāriputra, this Absolute Body is Quiescent, of
non-dualistic nature. Being of uncreated nature 444)
nature 444), O Śāri-
putra, this Absolute Body is Constant, of undestructible character”.
(X) ASAMBHEDA 445)
The Essence 446) of the Tathāgata characterized as having reached
the ultimate point of perfect purification in this pure state is of undiffer-
entiated (asambheda) nature. With reference to this meaning of “ undif-
ferentiation’ we have one śloka.
(Kārikā 26)
It is the Absolute Body, it is the Tathāgata,
Also it is the Holy Truth, the Highest 447) Nirvāņa;
Therefore, being indivisible from qualities like the sun with its rays,
There is no Nirvāṇa, apart from the Buddhahood. || 84 ||
pa,
442) uddeśa & nirdesa, T. bstan-pa & bśad-
c. #, respectively.
443) AAN 467 b. T. (as well as Ms. B.) adds two verses here, which are no doubt
interpolations.
414) akſtrima-dharma, C. # VE E.
445) Cf. BGŚ 811 c ff. (10. Asambheda).
446) The reading “tathāgatadhātor' in Ms. B. does not have to be corrected with
-garbhasya ’, because it was the usual case to use the term dhātu in such headings in this
text, and there is no essential difference between both terms.
447) The combination of paramârtha with nirvāņa (nirvști in the text) is peculiar.
T. rendering is helpless to fix the meaning and C. om. paramârtha. Does it mean Nir-
vāņa of the Buddha and not that of Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha?
Cf. DAŚ 893 c (on Ekatva): It BP E F EP * kn
亦即是聖諦第一義涅槃不異猶如冷即水功德
TE SE.
[ 258 ]



The Rat na gotravibhāga
§ 1. Synonyms of the Essence of the Tathāgata.
Here, what is shown by the former half of the śloka ?
It should be known, in brief,
There are 4 synonyms, the Absolute Body and others
Since [the Germ) in the Immaculate Sphere
Has four meanings from different aspects. // 85 //
In short, there are four meanings in regard to the Matrix of the Ta-
thāgata as the Immaculate Sphere (or Essence). In accordance with
these 4 meanings, there should be known 4 synonyms 448). Then which
are the 4 meanings ?
It is indivisible from the Buddha's Properties,
Its Germ has been perfected as it is 449)
It is not of false, deceptive nature
And it is quiescent from the very outset 451). || 86 ||
450)
1) The first meaning: (the Essence of the Buddha) is indivisible
from the Buddha's properties. With reference to this meaning, it is
said as follows 452) :
“ O Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata is not empty 453) [because
it is endowed] with the Buddha's Properties which are inconcei-
vable, indivisible, inseparable [from Wisdom) 454) and are greater
in number than the sands of the Gangā”.
448) nāmaparyāya, T. min-gi rnam
m-grans, c. ().
819) tathāgama, T. de-bshin thob-pa, c. I. I kp PE for tadgotrasya
tathāgamaḥ). An explanation of the meaning of 'tathāgata ’.
450) amrşāmoșadharmitva, c. T.
461) ādiprakſti śāntatā, c. O * ** ** should be take according to
the meaning). Cf. BGś ibid.: DU # # 1) — tJ DE SU TET 1996;
2) - USJ H; 3) #ELTE; 4) *** F .
452) ŚMS 221 c.
453) aśūnya, T. mi-ston-pa, c.T. On this conception, further explanation will
be given in S. p. 76, vv. 154–5 and commentary thereon. Lit. tathāgatagarbha is not
empty of buddhadharmāḥ (buddhadharmair aśūnyam).
454) amuktajña, T. bral mi-ses-pa, C. T E (lit. unreleased from the wisdom).
[ 259 ]
18



J. TAKASAKI
2) The second meaning: Its Germ, i.e. the Innate Nature has been
perfected 455) in an inconceivable manner With reference to this
point, it is said as follows 457):
456).
[This Germ], having attained the Absolute Essence, has come
down since beginningless time from one existence to another exi-
stence 458) assuming 459) various forms consisting of six organs of
cognitions, (i.e. in the form of various living beings) ”.
3) The third meaning: It is not of false, deceptive nature. With
reference to this point, it is said as follows 460):
Here, that which is the Highest Truth is Nirvāṇa, whose nature
is undeceptive. For what reason ? Because the Germ is eternal
by its being quiescent ” 461).
4) The fourth meaning: It is of the nature of absolute quiescence.
With reference to this point, it is said as follows 462):
“ Being in Nirvāṇa from the very outset, the Tathāgata, the Arhat,
the Perfectly enlightened One is of neither origination nor destruc-
tion”.
458)
455) samudāgama, T. thob-pa. āgama (in the verse). C. has no literal translation.
456) acintya-prakāra, T. bsam-gyis mi-khyab-paủi rnam-pa. It stands for tathā
in the verse.
457) C. mentions the name of the source, Şadāyatanasūtra (or Şaļindriyarāśi-sūtra)
R*), which is missing now. The following quotation shows a quite unique
interpretation of the word tathāgata. AĀS 469 b 切眾生有陰界入勝
相種類內外所顯,無始時節相續流法爾所得,至明
#r. BGś quotes the sentence as from AĀS (812 a) (X for 1). Cf. BBh. 3.
11. 2–4 (on prakſtistha-gotra).
parampara, T. brgyud-nas (from ancestors).
158) tādịśaḥ, T. de-hdra-ba (connecting with şadāyatanaviệeşaḥ), C.CATR Rp.
460) The source is uncertain. (Cf. AkşP. 197b). O attributes it to ŚMS, but C. does
not mention the name of the source, and I could not find the exact passage in ŚMS. I
suppose this quotation is also from the Şadāyatanasūtra, because, according to C., a
vocative ' bhagavan ’ is also inserted in the previous quotation and the Şadāyatanasūtra
seems to have had a structure similar to the ŚMS, i.e. someone is expressing his under-
standing in front of the Buddha and the Buddha acknowledges it.
461) T. reading shi-ba(sama) is preferable from the context. c.
ÆT
monte (śāśvatadharmatayā).
462) JĀA 241 c.
[ 260 ]



The Rat na gotra vibhāga
For these four meanings, there are four synonyms, namely, 1) the
Absolute Body; 2) the Tathāgata; 3) the Highest Truth, and 4) the
Nirvāṇa, respectively. It is said as follows 463):
“ The Matrix of the Tathāgata, O Śāriputra, is the name for the
Absolute Body.
“O Lord, the Tathāgata and the Absolute Body, these both are
not different from each other 464). The Absolute Body is, 0
Lord, nothing but the Tathāgata ”.
“ Under the name of the Extinction of the Suffering, O Lord,
there is indicated the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, being
endowed with such properties ”.
“ The Sphere of the Nirvāṇa, O Lord, is the name for the Abso-
lute Body of the Tathāgata ".
§ 2. The Point: Buddhahood is Nirvāņa.
Now, what is shown by the latter half of the śloka ?
Being the Perfect Enlightenment in all aspects,
And being the removal of pollutions along their root 465),
Buddhahood and Nirvāņa
Are one and the same in the highest viewpoint 466). || 87 ||
These four synonyms of the Immaculate Essence converge into the
undifferentiated 467) meaning of the Essence of the Tathāgata. Therefore,
these four are one in their sense, and hence, by means of 468) the Doctrine
of non-duality, the following fact is to be known. Namely, that which
is called “ Buddhahood' because of its Perfect Enlightenment regarding
all kinds of phenomena, and that which is called "Nirvāṇa' because of
its removal of pollutions along with their remaining forces which takes
463) AAN 467 a; ŚMS 220c, 222 a, 220 c, respectively.
464) A negative particle 'na' is to be inserted before. anyo dharmakāyaḥ' (-gato
nānyo dharmakāyaḥ).
465) The first one is for buddhatva and the next one is for nirvāṇa. See commentary.
468) C. reads ' inseparable from the highest truth' - R.
467) T. om. abbhinna, for which C.
468) nayamukhena, T. tshul-gyi sgo-nas, C
C. M (THE — #MIT
— 19 for advayadharmanayamukhena).
PK (ekarasa).
[ 261 ]



J. TAKASAKI
place simultaneously with 469) the Perfect Enlightenment, these two are
non-dual, indivisible and inseparable 470) in the Immaculate Sphere.
[So it is said] 471)
“ Liberation is of the characteristic
Indivisible from the properties, which are
Of all kinds, innumerable, unthinkable and immaculate 472);
This Liberation, that is the Tathāgata".
Also, it is said in the Scripture 473) with reference to the Nirvāņa
of the Arhat and Pratyekabuddha :
“ [Here], O Lord, the Nirvāṇa is merely a means used by the Ta-
thāgata”.
By this passage it is explained that this [Nirvāṇa of the Arhats and
the Pratyekabuddhas) is a means made by the Perfectly Enlightened Ones
who have the highest Controlling Power on [all] phenomena 474) in
order to protect them (i.e. Arhats and Pratyekabuddhas) against retreat;
it is just like the illusory city in the forest 475) made for the travellers
who are tired 476) after their long way [in order to encourage them).
[On the other hand] it is said: 477):
By reason of having attained Nirvāṇa, O Lord, the Tathāgatas,
the Arhats, the Perfectly Enlightened Ones are endowed with
properties showing the ultimate point of the entireness, immeasure-
bility, inconceivability and purity".
By this passage it is explained that, having realized the Nirvāņa
which is characterized as being inseparable from the accomplishment 478)
6
catu-
469) mahâbhisambodhāt. C. as S. But T. adds lhan-cig (together), which makes the
meaning clear. C. om. buddhatva & nirvāṇa.
470) C. adds one epithet more:
Titel (avinirbhāga).
471) Both S. & T. are lacking the heading. But c. DET KAN
19 (yata āha Mahāparinirvāṇasūtre). The place in MPS remained untraced.
472 sarvākāra, asamkhyeya, acintya, amala, respectively. These 4 are called
rākāraguņanispatti' in the commentary.
473) ŚMS 219 c.
474) dharma-paramêśvara. An epithet of the Buddha.
ațavi, T. ḥbrog-dgon, C. H .
478) pariśrānta, T. dub-pa, C. .
477) ŚMS 219 c.
478) nispatti (the reading . nișpatsv- ' in the text should be corrected. See S. p. 58,
1. 9 & 12), T. grub-pa, c. . nişthāgata (in the quotation).
475)
[ 262 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
of properties of four kinds 479), the Perfectly Enlightened Ones identify
themselves with Nirvāṇa 480); therefore, as both of these, Buddhahood and
Nirvāņa, are endowed with inseparable properties, no one 481) can realize
Nirvāṇa apart from Buddhahood.
§ 3. The Parable of the Painters.
Now, in the Immaculate Sphere, the Buddhas are possessed of all
kinds of properties since they have accomplished 482) the Non-substantiality
endowed with all sorts of excellency 483). This is here to be known through
the illustration of the painters 484).
485)
Suppose there were some painters
[Each of them] expert in a different sphere,
So that whatever skill possessed by one of them,
The others could not understand 486). || 88 ||
Then a mighty king would give them
A painting cloth 487) with the following commandment:
On this [cloth] ye all should draw my portrait 488). // 89 //
Then the painters, having promised 489) [to the king],
Would start their work of painting.
Of these [painters] engaged in this work,
483)
470) See Note 471. Here (in ŚMS), the four terms are as follows: 1) sarva; 2) aprameya;
3) acintya; 4) việuddhi. Cf. BGŚ 812 c: đg , PL] ft II (đi ky-k – tJJ
U , - TE IH PO, ETA E PE TH Pha, PL **
TH THE
480) tadātmakam bhavati.
481) T. hgah yan (=kaścid), c. Li THLEF (kasyacid ... na).
482) abhinirhāra, T. mnon-par bsgrubs-pa, C. T .
vara, T. mchog (= śreștha), C. om.
484) This illustration of the painters is originally taken from the Ratnacūdasūtra.
C. quotes the original account after the verses. Cf. RCS 176 a.
485) citra-lekhaka, T. ri-mo ḥdri-byed-pa (for ḥdri, þbri, to draw, would be better
in sense, though the former is often used).
486) avadhārayati (to understand), T. zin-pa (to apprehend), c. 48.
487) dūşya, T. ras, C. (A)
488) pratikrti, T. gzugs, C. (1).
pratiśrutya, T. thos-gyur te (having heard of it), C. th 2 (having accepted
the commandment of the king).
[ 263 ]



J. TAKASAKI
One would have gone abroad 490). // 90 //
Because of his absence during his being abroad
This picture would remain
Without the completion of all parts;
Thus the parable is made. // 91 ||
The painters who are meant here are
Charity, Morals, Patience and other dispositions 491)
Being endowed with all kinds of these excellencies,
The Non-substantiality is called the picture 492). || 92 ||
Here, of these [excellent virtues), charity and the rest, each one is dif-
ferentiated into limitless varieties in accordance with the Buddha's Sphere
[of activity]. Therefore, it should be known as 'immeasurable 493), On
account of its number and power, it should be known as being “incon-
ceivable' and, having exterminated the remaining force of pollutions 494)
by its enemies, in the form of 'envy', etc. 495), [each virtue] is to be
known as being pure'.
Now 496), through practice by means of Meditation on the Non-
substantiality endowed with all sorts of excellencies, the Non-origination
of [all] the elements 497) is realized. Because of this realization, [Bodhi-
sattvas can) ascend to their 8th Stage called Acalā (Immovable), where
they can get the knowledge of the Path which is indiscriminative, fault-
less 498), without any break and bearing its own taste 499). On the basis
400) viyoga, T. ma tshań (incomplete), C. RE.
401) T. om. äkāra, for which C. TT. These are the so-called şał-pāramitāḥ.
492) C. adds one verse saying: ' One painter is absent means the lack of one ākāra,
* non-completion of the king's portrait means the non-endurance of the knowledge
of non-substantiality. T. (D) inserts unnecessarily one Pada between c and d of v. 92,
saying: de-la mnon-par sbyin rnams-kyi.
483) aparimita, T. tshad med-pa, c. file it. This is for aprameya, the 2nd of the
4 characteristics.
494) T. om. mala, but C. has it.
406) 1) mātsarya (c. PEB); 2) kaukętya (c. E PE); 3) dveşa (c. Bū); 4) kausidya
(c. 14 ); 5) vikşepa (c. W L); and 6) moha (C. 4); are vipakşas of dāna, sila,
kşānti, vīrya, dhyāna, and prajñā, respectively.
496) Hereafter, on the relation of the 4 characteristics to the Stages of Bodhisattva.
Cf. BGŚ 813 a, MSbh (P), 258 b.
497) anutpattika-dharma, T. mi-skye-baħi chos-ñid, C. FE #ÆR (=anutpat-
tika-dharma-kṣānti).
498) niſchidra, T. skyon med-pa (without defect), C. FILE PD (without interruption).
svarasavāhin, ran-gi nan-gis hjug-pa. C. * (natural).
499)
[ 264 ]



The Rat na gotravibhāga
503)
of this knowledge, the entireness of Buddhas ’ properties in the Immacu-
late Sphere is completed. On the Stage of Bodhisattva called Sādhumati
(Perfect Knowledge), by means of immeasurable forms of Meditation and
magic formulas like the ocean 500), they can obtain the knowledge 501) for
assuming the immeasurable properties of the Buddha. On the basis of
this knowledge, the “immeasurability' of (Buddhas '] properties is com-
pleted. On the Bodhisattva's [last] Stage called Dharmameghā, basing
himself upon the knowledge revealing
502) the secret
state of all the
Buddhas, the 'inconceivability' of Buddhas' properties is completed.
Immediately after this stage, on the basis of knowledge which leads to
the liberation from all impediments on account of Defilements and Know-
ables along with their remaining forces, aiming at the acquisition of the
Stage of Buddha, the highest 'purity' of Buddhas' properties is comple-
ted. As the Arhats and the Pratyekabuddhas cannot perceive 504) these
four knowledges, the foundations of these Stages [above Acalā], they are
said to be far from the Sphere of the Nirvāņa 505) characterized as being
indivisible from the accomplishment of the properties of the [above men-
tioned] four kinds.
§ 4. Similarity of the Buddhahood to the Sun.
The Intellect, the Wisdom and the Liberation
Are [respectively) bright, radiant, and clear,
And they are inseparable 506) from [the Absolute Essence];
Therefore, they are similar to the light,
The rays, and the disk of the sun. // 93 //
That which is indicated as the Sphere of the Nirvāņa characterized
as being inseparable from the accomplishment of four kinds of properties
through the Intellect, the Wisdom and the Liberation, is explained to
500) For samudra, T. reads brgya-ston (= satasahasra), but C. Y.
501) C. calls this jñāna “šūnya(tā)-jñāna’ ().
602) aviparokşa, T. Ikog-tu ma gyur-pa, C. EL Fij.
503) guhya, T. gsar-ba, c.
504) samdyśyate, T. mthon-ba, (as Parasmaipada), C. "to be?.
505) Cf. ŚMS 219 c (after the explanation of caturākāraguņa' of the Tathāgata):
是故阿羅漢辟支佛 去涅槃界遠,
506) abheda, T. tha-dad-med, C.
[ 265 ]



J. TAKASAKI
have similarity to the sun in four aspects, namely, by three aspects 507)
on account of the Intellect, etc., respectively, and by one (in general].
Here in the Buddha's body 508), 1) The transcendental Intellect which is
supermundane and indiscriminative is, through its engaging in the destruc-
tion of darkness (that hides] the highest true essence of everything cog-
nizable, akin to the light ſof the sun); 2) The Wisdom of Omniscience 509)
which is attained subsequently 510) is, through its penetrating everything
knowable of all kinds, without exception, akin to the radiance of the
net 511) of rays; 3) The Liberation of the Innate Mind, the basis of the
above two (Intellect and Wisdom), has a resemblance to the purity of
the disk of the sun throughits being perfectly free from pollution and its
being radiant; and 4) As these three are undifferentiated from the Ab-
solute Essence, there is a similarity to the light and others through their
indivisibility [from the sun].
Therefore, without the acquisition of Buddhahood,
There is no attainment of Nirvāṇa,
Just as it is impossible to see the sun,
Avoiding 512) its light and rays. // 94 //
Thus, within the Essence [of the Buddha] which is endowed with 513)
the virtuous qualities as its own nature constantly associated 514) since
beginningless time, there exists the essential nature 515) of the indivisible
properties of Tathāgatas. Therefore, unless the Buddhahood 516), i.e. the
true introspection 517)
by the Intellect 518) free from attachment and of no
507) kāraṇa in the text. It is preferably corrected into ākāra. (T. rnam-pa). C. om.
• tribhir ekena ca kāraṇena'.
508) buddhasāntānika, T. sans-rgyas-kyi rgyud-la mñaḥ-ba, C. OLE.
509) sarvajña-jñāna, T. śes-bya thams-cad-kyi ye-śes (sarvajñeyajñāna), C.
- ETJ
.
510) prsthalabdha, T. rjes-la thob-pa. C. simply ** (in comparison with prajñā ).
511) jāla, T. dra-ba, c. M.
512) niruriya (fr. nir V vrj, Pali nibbajjeti), T. spańs-nas, C.
#.
613) upahita, T. -dan ldan-pa.
514) sāņnidhya, T. ñe-bar gnas-pa (= upasthita).
C. om. from sāmnidhya up to
upahite, and instead has
516) avinirbhāga-gunadharmatva, T. yon-tan rnam-par dbyer-med-paại chos-ñid
yin-pa. For dharmatva, c. Æ (= dharmakāya).
616) tathāgatatva buddhatva. T. om. -tva.
jñāna-darśana, T. ye-ses-kyi gsigs-pa, C. om. darśana.
516) T. om. prajñā, for which C. has
anāsrava,
517)
[ 266 )



The Rat na gotravibhāga
hindrance, is understood, the acquisition will not take place, i.e. the
realization of the Sphere of Nirvāṇa characterized as the liberation from
all the impediments, just as we cannot see the disk of the sun without
perceiving its light and rays. Therefore, it is said 519);
“O Lord, there is no acquisition of the Nirvāņa for [those who
maintain] the inferiority or superiority of [all] the elements 520).
The acquisition of the Nirvāṇa is, O Lord, available [only] to (those
who know] the equality of all the elements. [In other words], 0
Lord, it is for those who have the Wisdom of equality, those who
have the liberation of equality 521), or those who have attained the
true introspection through the liberation of equality. Therefore,
O Lord, it is said the Sphere 522) of the Nirvāṇa is of unique taste,
of equal taste. That is to say, [it is of one and the same] taste
with Wisdom 523) and Liberation”.
519) ŚMS 220 b. (Lit. therefore she (= Śrimālādevi) said).
520) hina-praṇīta-dharmāņām (Bahuvrihi comp.).
DAŚ also quotes the same passage and, prior to the quotation has an interpreta-
tion of this subject. It runs as follows:
“ It should be known, furthermore, that there is only one way of the One Vehicle.
If otherwise, there should be another nirvāņa than this. How may it be possible for the
superior nirvāṇa and the inferior nirvāṇa to exist within one dharmadhātu? Also, we cannot
say we get one result on the basis of higher or lower causes. If there were a difference
among the causes, there would also be a difference among the results”. (DAŚ 894 a).
sama-vimukti.
522) T. om, dhātu, but C. has it.
623) vidyā, T. rig-pa, C. BA.
521)
[ 267 )



IX.
THE 9 ILLUSTRATIONS ON THE GERM COVERED WITH
DEFILEMENTS 1)
§ 1. The 9 Illustrations according to the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra.
Thus have been explained the characteristics
Of the Matrix of the Buddha from 10 aspects;
Now, this Matrix, as concealed by the covering of defilements
Is to be known by the following illustrations. || 95 ||
Thus, with reference to the existence 2) of the Essential Nature 3),
as eternal as the ultimate limit [of the world] 4), we have hitherto explained
the characteristics of the Matrix of the Tathāgata from 10 points of
view. And hereafter, with reference to the fact that the covering of
defilements is essentially unconnected 5) [with the Innate Mind] although
associating with 6) it since the beginningless time, and
and the
pure
Essential Nature, likewise associating since the beginningless time, is
essentially connected with it [as being its own nature], it should be under-
stood, by 9 illustrations based upon the Scripture 8), that the Matrix
of the Tathāgata is concealed by the limitless ) coverings of defilements.
Which are the 9 illustrations?
(Kārikās 27-57)
Like the Buddha in an ugly lotus flower,
Like honey surrounded by bees,
1) C. THE WHITE *. Cf. BGŚ 806 c-808 c.
2) samvidyamānatā, T. rig-par bya-ba-ñid, C. not clear.
3) dharmatā, T. chos-ñid, c. .
aparântakoți-sama, T. phyi-maḥi mthaḥi mu dan mtshuns-pa. This formula (apa-
rântakoțisama-dhruvadharmatā-samvidyamānatā) is, together with the next two formulae
(on kleśakośatā and subhadharmatā), originally taken from AAN. 467 b. See my Intro-
duction, n. 66.
5) asambaddha, T. ma ħbrel-ba, C. om.
6) sāmnidhya, T. ñe-bar gnas-pa (upasthita), C. covered
in the meaning.
» So T. (thog–ma med-pași dus-nas) and C. (FILE **). But S. anādi-.
8) TGS 457 a-460 b.
•) For aparyanta ... koți, c. O TA T.
9
[ 268 ]



The Ratnago tra vibhāga
15)
Like kernels of 10) grains covered by the husk,
Like gold fallen into impurities,
Like a treasure under the ground,
Like a sprout, etc. grown from a small fruit 11),
Like an image of the Buddha wrapped in a tattered 12) garment,
// 96 //
Like the kinghood 13) in the womb 14) of a poor woman,
And like a precious statue in the earthen mould;
In such a way, there abides this Essence
In the living beings obscured by occasional stains of defilements.
// 97 //
[In these illustrations], pollutions are like
A lotus flower, bees, husk, impurities and the ground,
Like the bark of a fruit, like a tattered garment,
Like a woman of misery, and like earth tormented by the fire of pains;
And the Buddha, honey, cleaned kernels 16), gold, treasure,
A Nyagrodha tree, a precious image, the Highest Lord of the world,
And a purified precious statue,
The excellent Essence has a resemblance to them. || 98 ||
(I) The Defilements are like the ugly sheath of lotus flowers, and
the Essence of the Tathāgata is akin to the Buddha 17).
Suppose the Buddha, shining with a thousand marks [of virtue],
Were abiding in the inside 18) a faded lotus flower,
10) sāra, T. sñin-po,
c. T. The edible part of grains.
11) alpa-phala, T. ubras-chuns, c. Rom. alpa).
12) praklinna = pūti (v. 98), T. hrul, c. *5 te weten die Wis).
13) npatva, = dvipâgrâdhipa (v. 98) T. mi-bdag, C. E cakravartin).
14) jațhala, T. lto[-ba] (belly).
15) jaghanya, T. nan (ugly), c. PL B (poor and ugly).
16) susāra.
17) Cf. TGS 457 c. The story given in the Sūtra is as follows: Once the Lord, sitting
in the assembly of Bodhisattvas, showed a miracle. There appeared thousands of
lotus flowers having the apparitional Buddha within and shining with splendour fra-
grant. They came to blossom at the same time, but all at once they became faded and
began to give a bad smell. But still there was the Buddha sitting within each flower.
Bodhisattvas were surprised at this sight and asked the Lord for the explanation of
this miracle. Then the Lord started his pronouncement on the Essence of the Tathāgata
abiding within each living being.
This idea of the origination of the Tathāgata is probably borrowed from the Tathā-
gatôtpattisambhavanirdeśa of the Avatamsaka.
18) garbha-vesțita, T. ... Îi khor gnas-pa, c. ...*
[ 269 ]



J. TAKASAKI
And a man of immaculate divine sight would perceive him
And release him from the sheath of petals 19) of lotus; // 99 //
Similarly, the Lord, with his Buddha's eyes,
Perceives his own nature even in those who are in the lowest world,
And, being immaculate, standing at the utmost limit 20) and being
full of Compassion,
He releases them from the obscurations. || 100 ||
Just as a person of divine sight perceives
A faded 21) and ugly lotus flower and the Buddha within it,
And rends asunder the petals [in order to draw him out];
In the same way, the Lord perceives the world,
The Matrix of the Buddha, covered with the sheath of stains, Desire,
Hatred 22), etc.,
And kills 23) its Obscurations 24) because of Compassion. // 101 ||
(II) The Defilements are like honey-bees, and the Essence of the
Tathāgata is akin to the honey 25).
Suppose a clever person, having seen
Honey surrounded by 26) cloudy bees,
And wishing to get it, with skillful means,
Would deprive the bees completely of it; - // 102 //
Similarly, the Great Sage, possessed of the eyes of the Omniscience,
Perceiving this Essence known as akin to honey,
Accomplishes the non-connection 27) of the Essence
With the bees-like obscurations, completely. || 103 ||
Just as a man who is desirous of getting honey
Hidden by thousands, millions 28) of bees,
19)
pattra, T. reads padma instead of pattra. Here pattra stands for kośa.
20) = being eternal (c. les
21) sammiñjita, T. thum[-pa] (something packed or wrapped up), c. $5 m.
T. reads jalaruha as locative, instead of accusative in S.
22) C. ·kleśa'. T. as S.
23) nir V han, T. hjoms-pa, C. Be (to remove).
24) nivaraņa, T. sgrib-pa (= āvaraņa). C. reads analogically # (petals).
25) Cf. TGS 457 c-458 a.
26) upagūdha (concealed), T. bskor (surrounded), c. (as T.).
27) aśleșa, T. rab-tu spon-ba (= prahāņa), C. similar to T.
28) sahasra-koți-niyuta, T. bya-ba khrab-khrig ston (niyuta-koti-sahasra), c. F
#fu. JH fue = nayuta, for niyuta).
[ 270 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
29)
use
as
Drives the bees
the bees away
and makes of the honey 30)
he wishes;
In the same way, the immaculate Wisdom in the living beings
Is like honey, and the Defilements are like bees;
The Buddha, like that man, knows how to remove the stains.
//104 //
(III) The Defilements are like the outer husk, and the Essence of
the Tathāgata is akin to the inner kernel 31).
The kernel of grains covered with the husk
Cannot be eaten by any person;
Those who wish to utilize it as food and the like 32)
Take it out from the husk; // 105 //
Similarly, the Buddhahood in the living beings
Is polluted with the stains of Defilements,
And unless it is freed from the association of stains of Defilements,
It cannot perform the Acts of Buddha in the 3 Spheres. // 106 //
Just as the kernel of grains like rice, wheat, barley, etc. 33),
As long as it is unreleased from the husk and not cleaned
well 34)
Cannot be the sweet edible for the people;
Similarly, the religious king 35) residing in the living beings,
Having his feature unreleased from the husk of Defilements,
Does not become one who can grant the pleasurable taste of the
Doctrine,
To the people who are afflicted by the hunger of Defilements. // 107||
20) viniharya (fr. vi-ni Vhan), C. (killing). But T. bsal te (fr. sel-ba, to
remove), which gives a better sense.
30) The form madhvā as inst, sg. of madhu (neut.) is peculiar. (Is it a special form
in some Prakrit or merely a wrong reading of madhunā?).
31) Cf. TGS 458 a.
32) annâdibhir (inst.) is grammatically peculiar (usually in loc.).
33) kanguka-śāli-kodrava-yava-vrihi. All these are varieties of grains, their equi-
valents are not so clear. The last one, vrihi seems to stand for corn or grain in general,
for which T. & C. are hbru, i, respectively. T. sālu, bra-bo, nas, ņbru (the second one
is a kind of wheat), C. RA, ..
34) khādy-asusamskặta, T. gra-ma-can legs-par ma bgrus (having hairs and not
yet cleaned) (bgrus means to step on the bag filled with corns in order to remove
the husk). C. #va. See J's note 1 on S. p. 62.
35) dharmêśvara, C. O I.
[ 271 ]



J. TAKASAKI
(IV) The Defilements are like a dirty place 36) filled with impurities,
and the Essence of the Tathāgata is akin to gold 37).
Suppose a traveller would happen to drop
A piece of gold in a place filled with impurities 38),
And the gold would stay there for many hundreds of years
As it were, without changing its quality; -- // 108 //
Then a god possessed of immaculate divine eyes
Would see it there and tell a man:
Here is a piece of gold, fresh 39) and the highest of precious
things.
You should purify it and make use of it as a treasure; -- // 109 ||
Similarly, the Buddha perceives the quality of living beings
Drowned in the Defilements which are like impurities,
And pours the rain of the Doctrine over the living beings
In order to wash off that dirt of defilements. || 110 ||
Just as a god, perceiving a piece of gold, the most beautiful one,
Fallen into a dirty place filled with impurities,
Would show it to the people in order to purify 40) it from dirt 41);
In the same way, the Buddha, perceiving the treasure of the Buddha
in the living beings
Which is fallen into a big pit of impurities of defilements,
Teaches the Doctrine to the living beings in order to purify the
treasure. // 111 ||
(V) The Defilements are like the underground 42), and the Essence
of the Tathāgata is akin to a treasure of jewels 43).
Suppose there were an inexhaustible treasure
Under the ground within the house of a poor man;
However this man might not know about that treasure,
39)
nava.
36) samkāra-dhāna, T. ljan-ljin-kyi gnas, C. simply “impurities '. dhāna stands
here for ādhāna. samkāra is replaced in verses by samkara.
37) Cf. TGS 458 a-b.
38) samkara-pūti-dhāna, T. ljan-ljin rul-baħi gnas.
T. & C.
40) T. reads ‘kun-tu dgaḥ-bar bya phyir' (in order to gladden them, O.), which
is probably a misreading for kun-tu dag-par bya phyir ’.
41) T. reads " bālāt' (nan-gyis) instead of malāt. But C. as S.
42) tala, T. mthil (depth), C. om.
48) Cf. TGS 458 b. Also cf. MPS (Taisho, XII, p. 407 b).
om. it.
[ 272 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
And the latter could not say to him “I am here ’; // 112 ||
Similarly, though there is a treasure of immaculate jewel,
The inconceivable, inexhaustible 44) properties in the mind,
The living beings of the world, without knowing it,
Constantly 45) experience the suffering of poverty in various ways.
// 113 //
Just as a treasure of jewels in the house of a poor man
Would not say to him “I am here ’,
Nor the man could know here is a treasure of jewels ';
Likewise is the treasure of properties dwelling in the house of the
mind 46),
And the living beings are like a poor man;
To enable those people to obtain this treasure,
The Sage makes his appearance in the world. || 114 //
(VI) The Defilements are like the bark-covering [of a seed], and the
Essence of the Tathāgata is akin to the germ within a seed 47).
Just as the germ of a seed inside the fruit of trees
Of Mango, Tāla 48), etc. is of an imperishable nature,
And, being sowed in the ground, by contact with water, etc.,
Gradually attains the nature of the king of trees; // 115 //
In the same way, the pure Absolute Essence, abiding in the living
beings,
Covered by the sheath within the bark of the fruit of ignorance
and the like,
[Grows] gradually by the help of this and that virtue
And obtains [finally) the state of the king of Sages. // 116 //
Conditioned by water, by the light of the sun,
By air, soil, time and space,
From within the husk of the fruit of the Tāla or mango
There comes out a tree;
Similarly, the germ of the seed of the Buddha,
Residing within the bark of the fruit, the defilements of living
beings,
44) akşayya (= akşaya).
46) ajasram, T.
rgyun-tu, C. om.
46) Remind of a similarity with the alayavijñāna theory.
47) Cf. TGS 458 c.
48) T. om, tāla, C. simply various kinds of tree'.
[ 273 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Thrives by the help of this and that virtue,
Resulting in the tree 49) of the Highest Truth. || 117 ||
(VII) The Defilements are like a tattered garment, and the Essence
of the Tathāgata is akin to a precious image 50).
Suppose an image of the Buddha made of precious jewels
Wrapped in the tattered garment of bad smell
Were cast off 51)
on the road, and
A god, perceiving it, would speak to travellers
About this matter 52), in order to retrieve it; // 118 //
Similarly, the One who has eyes
53) of no obstacle
Perceives, even among those in the world of animals 54),
The nature 55) of the Buddha concealed by the stains 56) of various
kinds of Defilements,
And, for the sake of its liberation [from Defilements],
Provides the means 57) [of deliverance). || 119 ||
Just as a god with divine eyes, seeing the Buddha's image
Wrapped in a bad-smelling garment, and rejected 58) on the road,
Would show it to the people in order to retrieve it;
In the same way the Lord, perceiving even among animals,
The Essence [of the Buddha thrown on the road of transmigration,
10) vitapa (small plant), T. hthon (coming out), c.*I for dharma-
vitapa.
60) Cf. TGS 458 c-459 a. The story given in the Sūtra is as follows: There was a
person who kept one golden image of the Buddha. He was on the way to another country
along a dangerous path. For fear of robbers, he wrapped that image in tattered
garment so that nobody could notice of it. As this person passed all of a sudden on the
way, the image was abandoned in a field and left unknown to travellers who thought
it merely a dirty cloth of no value. There happened to come a man of divine eyes,
who, recognizing the image within the tattered garment, picked it up out of the garment
and saluted it.
61) For ujjhita, T. gnas (placed), C.
(placed), C. TË or
LÓ TÉ (fallen) in v. 120.
52) etam artham (this thing).
58) T. om. cakṣuḥ, which C. has.
64) C. ‘in the lowest world (avici) ?.
56) ātmabhāva, T. dňos-po (nature), C. (ko j (=kāya).
36) T. om. mala, which C. has.
57) abhyupāya, T. thabs, c. t . For vidadhāti, T. ston-mdsad, c. (H)
(preaches the highest doctrine).
58) ujjñita in the text should be corrected into ujjhita.
[ 274 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
With the covering of the tattered garment of Defilements,
Taught the Doctrine for the sake of its deliverance. // 120 //
(VIII) The Defilements are like a pregnant woman 59) and the Essence
of the Tathāgata is akin to an Emperor contained in the Embryonal
elements 60).
61)
65)
Suppose an ugly woman without a protector
Were abiding in an orphanage 62),
And, bearing the glory of royalty as an embryo 63),
Might not know the king in her own womb 64). || 121 ||
The generation of worldly existence is like an orphanage,
Like a pregnant woman are the impure living beings,
And the immaculate Essence in them is like that embryo 66),
Owing to the existence of which, they become possessed of protec-
tion. || 122 //
Just as a woman, whose body is covered with a dirty garment
And having ugly features, experiences in an orphanage,
The greatest pain when the king is in her womb;
Similarly the living beings abiding in the house of misery,
And whose mind is not quiet by the power of Defilements,
Imagine themselves without a protector
Though the good protectors are residing in their own bodies.
// 123 //
67)
69)
āpanna-sattva-nāri, T. sems-can shugs-paḥi mi-mo (a woman who is bearing
an embryo). sattva here means an embryo.
60) kalala-mahābhūtagata. For kalala, T. mer-mer-po, c. h .. kalala is
the first stage of embryo. Of this example, cf. TGS 459 a.
61) anātha (Lit. without a protector) T. mgon-med, C. PA JE. (It means “abandoned
by her husband', or widow ').
62) anātha-āvasatha, T. mgon-med ḥbug-gnas, anātha-śāla (T. ... khyim), anātha-
veśman (T. ... khan-pa), c. TE
garbha, T. mnal. mňal means 'womb' and not "embryo’, but here garbha seems
to mean embryo. See below.
64) kukṣu, T. lte (centre), C. “inside of body'.
antarvat, T. mňal-ldan (garbhavat), C. (possessed of embryo).
66) tad-garbhavat. For garbha, T. mnal-gnas (= garbha-sthita, that which is within
the womb), C. JE PA (embryo within the womb).
67) sannátha, T. mgon-bcas, C. A M. Both takes it as sanātha.
63)
65)
[ 275 ]
19



J. TAKASAKI
(IX) The Defilements are like an earthen mould 88) and the Essence
of the Tathāgata is akin to a golden statue 69).
Suppose a man who knows ſhow to make a statue),
Seeing that the statue, filled with melted gold inside
And covered with clay outside, had become cool,
Would, for purifying the inner gold, remove the outer covering;
// 124 /
Similarly, the One who has got the highest Enlightenment,
Perceiving always 70) the radiance of the Innate Mind
And the occasionality of the stains,
Purifies the world, which is like a mine of jewels, from obstructions.
// 125 //
Just as a statue made of pure, shining gold
Would become cool within the earthen covering,
And, knowing this, a skillful jewel-maker would remove the clay;
In the same way the Omniscient perceives that
The Mind 71), which is like pure gold, is quiescent 72),
And, by means of a stroke 73) [called] the method of teaching the
He removes the obscurations. || 126 //
Doctrine 74),
The summarized meaning of the illustrations is as follows:
Inside a lotus flower, amidst bees,
Inside the husk, impurities, and the ground,
Within the bark of a fruit, within a tattered garment,
In the womb of a woman, and inside clay, respectively, // 127 ||
Like the Buddha, like honey, like the kernel of grains,
Like gold, like a treasure, and like a tree,
Like a precious image, like the Emperor,
And like a golden statue, // 128 //
The Innate Mind of the living beings
Which is pure from beginningless time,
68) mrt-parka-lepa, T. saḥi ḥdam gos-pa, c. *.
69) Cf. TGS 459 a-b.
70) T. om. sadā, which C. has.
71) manas, T. yid, c. ERE.
manas here stands for cittaprakſti.
72) For śiva, c. 12 (firmly).
73) prahāra, T. brdeg-spyad, C. ** (hammer).
74) dharmakhyāna-naya, T. chos-hchad-tshul, c. X.
[ 276 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
And is not bound by the covering of Defilements,
Though being within them from the outset is thus illustrated 75).
// 129 //
In brief, by this explanation of the illustrations given in the Tathā-
gatagarbha-sūtra, there is shown the fact that, for all living beings,
the defiling elements (which cover) over their mind from the beginningless
time are [merely] of an accidental nature, whereas the purifying elements
existing in the mind since beginningless time were born together (with
the mind), and hence, they are of an indivisible nature 76). Therefore, it
is said 77)
“ Owing to the impurities on the Mind, the living beings are defi-
led; owing to the Mind [itself], pure [by nature], they are purified ”.
§ 2. 9 Kinds of Defilements
the Impurities on the Mind 78).
Here, which are the impurities on the Mind, with reference to which
the 9 illustrations, a sheath of lotus flower, &c., have been explained?
Desire, Hatred and Ignorance 79), and their intense outburst,
[Ignorance in] the form of Impression 80)
76) C. abbreviates these 3 verses into two by avoiding repetition of the 9 examples.
C. distinguishes the situation of klešas and cittaprakſti by using tj for the former
and I ' (endowed with) for the latter.
76) Here is given the contrast between citta-samklesa-dharma and citta-vyavadāna-
dharma, namely the former is merely āgantuka, while the latter is sahaja and avinirbhāga,
although both are anādisāmnidhya (S. p. 59, 1. 12 ff.) with sattvas. This contrast is explained
in a previous passage by the terms asambaddha and sambaddha.
77) The source of this quotation is unknown, but we have a similar expression in
the Vimalakirti-nirdeśa (Taisho, XV, 563 b). This idea seems to be quite old and perhaps
we can trace back its origin as far as the Pāli Nikāyas (e.g. SN III, 151).
78) Cf. BGŚ 806 c.
70) C. adds a word toe, of which the equivalent in Skt. is not clear. Probably
it stands for anuśaya or bandhana (literally · ' is near to bandhana, but in the com-
mentary, these three kleśas are said to be in the state of anuśaya, and furthermore, ban-
dhana is usually rendered in Chinese by * i , while in this text, the same loti
(or ) is often used for anuśaya. If so, even more curious is the use of this We for
tivra-paryavasthāna in this verse. It seems quite wrong.
For paryavasthāna, T. has kun-ldan (= kun-nas Idan-ba) (= paryutthāna). See
v. 137.
80) Here vāsanā stands for avidyāvāsabhūmi. See prose commentary on this verse.
This use of vāsanā seems to support the Tibetan interpretation of the term avidyāvāsa-
bhūmi. See Note VIII-112.
[ 277 ]



J. TAKASAKI
The pollutions [which are to be removed by 81)]
The Path of Perception and that of Practice 82)
And those remaining in the impure and the pure Stages [of Bodhi-
sattva, respectively), || 130 ||
These 9 kinds of [defilements] are illustrated
By the example of the sheath of a lotus flower and others;
In their variety, however, the coverings of Defilements 83)
Extend beyond the limit of extremity in number. || 131 ||
In brief, these 9 kinds of Defilements make always their appearance
[on the Essence of the Tathāgata) as the incidental[attachment] 84), although
the latter is perfectly pure by nature, just like the sheath of a lotus flower
[covering] over the Buddha's image, and other examples. What are the
9 Defilements? They are, namely: 1) the Defilement characterized as
the dormant state 85) of Desire (rāgânuśayalakṣaṇa-klesa); 2) the Defile-
ment characterized as the dormant state of Hatred (dveşânuśayalaksaņa-k.);
3) the Defilement characterized as the dormant state of Ignorance (mo-
hânuśayalaksaņa-k.); 4) the Defilement characterized as the intense
outburst of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance (tivrarāgadveşamohaparyava-
sthānalaşaņa-k.); 5) the Defilement contained in the Dwelling Place of
Ignorance (avidyāvāsabhūmisamgrhīta-k.); 6) the Defilement to be extir-
pated by means of Perception (darśanaprahātavya-k.); 7) the Defilement
to be extirpated by means of Practice (bhāvanāprahātavya-k.); 8) the
Defilement remaining in the impure Stage [of Bodhisattva) (aśuddhabhū-
migata-k.); & 9) the Defilement remaining in the pure Stage [of Bodhi-
sattva] (śuddhabhūmigata-k.) 86).
81) T. inserts spons (= heya, prahātavya) after mārga. It is better for understanding.
82) dřň-mārga-bhāvanā. But T. & C., in usual order of darśana-bhāvanā-mārga.
83) upasamkleśa, T. ñe-baħi fon-mons, C. Tb
84) c. $ * *
86) anuśaya, T. bag-la ñal, C. (BGS DE).
86) For these 9, T., C. & BGś have as follows (BGś in parentheses):
1) ḥdod-chags bag-la ñal-gyi mtshan-ñid-kyi ñon-mons-pa, 貪使煩惱,
隨眠貪欲煩惱,
2) she-sdan, bu iki hef, SIE BITKIT :
3) gti-mug, W KTE, HO PER TE LIT PLAN
4) ḥdod-chags dan she-sdan dan gti-mug drag-pos kun-nas Idan-baḥi mtshan-ñid,
增上貪瞋癡結使煩惱,貪瞋癡等極重上惑)
t
[ 278 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhāga
Now first of all, 1)-3), there are those Defilements which are in the
bodies 87) of those worldly people who are freed from 88) Desire, and,
being the causes of Forces which accumulate the motionless State 89), give
rise to the Material and the Immaterial Sphere, and which are to be kil-
led 90) by means of the Supermundane Wisdom. These are here termed
the Defilements characterized as the dormant state of Desire, Hatred
and Ignorance. 4) Next, we have those Defilements which exist in the
bodies of those living beings who indulge in Desire and the rest, and
which, being the cause of Forces that accumulate merit and demerit,
give rise only to the Sphere of Desire, and are to be killed by means of
the Wisdom, [obtained] through the Contemplation of Impurity 91), etc.
They are called the Defilements characterized as the intense outburst of
Desire, Hatred and Ignorance. Then, 5) there are those Defilements which
are in the bodies of the Arhats, and, being the cause that produces
the Immaculate Actions, result in the birth of the pure Body made of
mind, and are to be killed by the Tathāgata's Wisdom of Enlightenment.
These are called the Defilements contained in the Dwelling Place of
Ignorance 92).
There are two kinds of individuals who undergo training (on the
5) ma-rig-paḥi bag-chags-kyi sas bsdus-pa, 無明住地所攝煩惱,
(FILE DA Æ L);
6) mthon-bas spar-bar bya-ba, L AT KUN, ET tet);
7) bsgom-pas span-bar bya-ba, 1 M FT
TO ME T ;
8) ma-dag-pași sa-la brten-pa, T # Lt pe 1);
9) dag-pași sa-la brten-pa, # t e re , #u.
87) sāntānika, (of santāna, lit. flux, stream), T. rgyud-la yod-pa, C. &
+ HT THE
88) vita, T. -dan bral-ba. C. failed to catch the sense, but BGS TE K.
89) ăniñjya-samskārôpacaya T. mi-gyo-baħi ħdu-byed-la sogs-pa, c.
TX
FT **. About āniñjya (= anijya, aniñjya, Pāli ānejja), see BHS Dic. s. v. Along with
punya and apunya, this āninjya forms samskāra which accumulates the Phenomenal
Existence (bhava). See below.
80) vadhya, T. gshom-par bya-ba, c.le.
91) aśuddhabhāvanā (text reading bhāva should be corrected), T. mi sdug-paḥi sgom-
pa, c.
7. See BHS Dic. 3. v., Mvyut. 52.
92) About avidyāvāsabhūmi, anāsravakarman and manomayakāya, see Note VIII-
112, 115. (where Bodhisattva is also included in this group).
[ 279 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Path] 93): a) the ordinary beings and b) the Saints. Now, 6) the Defi-
lements which exist in the body of ordinary beings training on the Path
and which are to be killed by the Wisdom [obtained through] the first 94)
Perception of the Transcendental Truth are termed the Defilements to
be extirpated by means of Perception. And, 7) the Defilements which
exist in the body of the Saints training on the Path and which are to be
killed by the Wisdom [obtained through] the Transcendental Practice
of the Truth according to their [Transcendental] Perception 95) are called
the Defilements to be extirpated by Practice.
[Lastly there are two kinds of Defilements associating with Bod-
hisattwas). 8) Those which are in the body of Bodhisattvas who have
not reached the ultimate perfection, and which are the enemy to the
Wisdom [attained] on the [first] 7 Stages 96) and are to be killed by
means of the Wisdom [obtained through] the Practice of the 3 Stages
beginning with the 8th, these are called the Defilements remaining in
the impure Stage [of Bodhisattva). 9) The Defilements which exist in the
body of Bodhisattvas who have reached the ultimate perfection, and
which are the enemy to the Wisdom [attained through] the Practice on
the (last) 3 Stages beginning with 8th and are to be killed by means of
the Wisdom [of the Buddha, obtained through] the Meditation called
“the Diamond-like’ 97), these are called the Defilements remaining in the
pure Stage [of Bodhisattva).
These 98)
93) śaikşa, T. slob-pa, C.
B. They may be called " bodhisattvayānika », i.e. Ma-
hāyānist. ‘ārya', here, seems to denote those Bodhisattvas who are below the 1st Stage,
in comparison with no. 8. But usually the attainment of darśanamārga is said to take
place on the 1st Stage of Bodhisattva.
94) T. regards prathama as prathamabhūmi. C. repeats lokottara and seems to render
this prathama by prathamalokottaracita (11) HEP L). But BGś inserts Futbo
E ** (anādikālâdıstapūrva) before prathama. It seems to be a good
interpretation of this prathama. That is to say, in comparison with "yathādssta’ in the
next, “prathama' means that this darśana has never been observed by the Hinayānists
and is to be attained 'for the first time' by the Mahāyānist. Paramārtha gives a
detailed explanation on this subject in his commentary on BGS (BGŚ 807 b).
95) yathādịşta. See above.
c. kp (yathā pūrvadựşta).
96) i.e. those which are not exterminated by the Wisdom attained in the first
7 Stages.
vajropama-samādhi. It is said to be the meditation in the highest stage of prac-
tice. (Mvyut, 21 & 55).
98) The following verse is, as J suggested, not a verse at all. This passage is merely
97)
[ 280 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
Nine Defilements, beginning with Desire,
Being taken in short, respectively,
Are illustrated by 9 examples,
That of the sheath of a lotus flower and others. || 132 ||
And, if taken in detail, [these Defilements] which are differentiated
into 84,000 groups, are as infinite as the Wisdom of the Tathāgata.
On this point, therefore, it is said that the Matrix of the Tathāgata is
concealed by the coverings of Defilements which extend beyond the limit
of extremity in number 99).
(Variety of Living Beings according to their Defilements).
The impurity (retained] in the ordinary beings,
The Arhats, the individuals in training (on the Path],
And the Bodhisattvas is [explained], respectively,
By these four, one, two and two kinds of pollution. || 133 ||
It has been said by the Lord that all living beings are posses-
sed of the Matrix of the Tathāgata 100). Here, ‘all living beings are
said to be, in short, fourfold: namely, 1) the ordinary beings; 2) the
Arhats; 3) the individuals in training [on the Path]; and 4) the Bod-
hisattvas. Their impurity, on account of which they cannot identify
themselves with] the Immaculate Sphere, is here explained by [the first]
four, [the next] one (the 5th) and two (the 6th & 7th) and again by
two (the 8th & 9th) kinds of Pollution, 101) respectively.
§ 3. Concordance between the 9 Illustrations and the 9 Defilements 102).
Now, how should the resemblance of 9 Defilements be known, Desire
and the rest, to the sheath of a lotus flower and others, respectively,
and how should the similarity be understood between the Essence of the
Tathāgata and [the examples), the Buddha's image and the rest?
an explanation of v. 131 ab and the following sentences are those of v. 131 cd. Perhaps
C. keeps the original form.
99) Cf. TGS (The second formula on tathāgatagarbha).
100) Cf. TGS (The first formula on tathāgatagarbha). (The reading garbha iti is to
be corrected into garbhā iti).
101) kleśa-mala.
T. om. mala.
102) Cf. BGŚ 807 c-808 a.
[ 281 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Just as the lotus flower born from the mud
Is delightful
103) in its first appearance,
But later on [when it withers], it is no more attractive;
Similar to it is the delight of Desire. // 137 //
Just as the honey-bees 104), being excited,
Sting sharply [and cause pain) 105);
In the same way, Hatred, being aroused,
Produces suffering in the heart. 11 135 //
Just as the kernel of rice 106) and others
Are concealed 107) by the outside husk,
Similarly, the perception of the Essential Truth 108)
Is hindered by the covering 109) of ignorance. // 136 //
Just as the impurities are somewhat disagreeable;
Likewise those who have got rid of desire 110)
[Regard] Passion as something disagreeable,
Being characterized as devoted to (such] Passion,
The outburst of Passions is repulsive like impurities. // 137 /
Just as the people 111), because of their ignorance,
Cannot obtain the treasure hidden under the ground 112),
In a similar way, they cannot obtain the Buddhahood
Hindered by the Dwelling Place of Ignorance 113). // 138 //
Just as a sprout and the like, growing gradually,
103)
mano-rama, T. yid-dgaḥ, C. . The analogies in the following verses seem
quite artificial.
106) bhramarāḥ prāņinaḥ (pl.), T. srog-chags sbran–ma, c. #
105) C. interprets: when they are making honey, they bite the flowers '.
106) For sāli, T. hbras (= vrihi, corn).
107) avacchanna samcanna, T. bsgribs-pa.
108) sārârtha, C. A M.
109) aņdakośa (lit, egg-shell).
110) For “kāmā virāgiņām’, T. reads "chags dan bcas rnams-kyi’ (kāma-avirāgi-
ņām, as J suggested). But C. reading
智觀貪亦爾(Ginilar is the case with
the wise man's observation of rāga), though being far from the literal translation, is still
close to S. And BGś has E
(virāgin) in the parallel passage, w
which
supports the text reading.
111) T. reads as jane (skye-la). But janāḥ is the subject word of āpunyur and is
used for both illustrating and being illustrated. C. shows this reading by repeating janāḥ.
vasudhā-antarita, c.
3. T. 'nor ni bsgribs-pas na ’ for this and
for this and mi-ses
gter ' for ajñānād nidhi is a misreading caused by the reading of jane for janāḥ.
118) The reading "avidyāvāsabhūmy-āvſtā had preferably be corrected into -āvstam,
being an adjective for svayambhūtvam, in comparison with the illustration above. So
have T. & C.
9
112)
[ 282 ]



The Rat na gotravib h ā ga
Break out the husk of the seed,
Similarly, by the Intuition of the Truth,
Those Defilements are removed which are to be extirpated by
Perception 114). || 139 ||
Those who have destroyed the ground of conception of personal-
lity 115)
Are following 116) in the [Practice of the] Saintly Path;
Therefore, their Defilements which are to be rejected
By the Wisdom of Practice are said to be like a tattered gar-
ment. || 140 //
The stains remaining in the [first] 7 Stages
Are like 117) the impurities of the receptacle of an embryo 118),
And the non-discriminative Wisdom has a resemblance
To the matured form of an embryo delivered from its covering. //141 //
The stains connected with 119) the [last] 3 Stages
Are known as being like the earthen mould,
And are to be destroyed by the Wisdom of the Buddhas 120)
[Obtained through] Meditation called the Diamondlike’. || 142 ||
Thus the 9 pollutions, Desire and the rest ,
Have a resemblance to a lotus flower and others,
And the Essence [of the Buddha), consisting of 3-fold nature,
Bears a similarity to the Buddha and the rest. // 143 //
6
§ 4. The 3-fold Nature of the Essence, the Purifying Element within
the Mind, and its Concordance with the 9 Illustrations 121).
The resemblance of the Matrix of the Tathāgata, being the cause for puri-
fying the Mind 122), in 9-fold, i. e. to the image of the Buddha and so
114) The analogy is not clear. C. says: “ darśanamārga removes the defilements and
makes the Stages grow up gradually ’.
115) hata-satkāya-sārāņām. T. ḥjig-tshogs snin-po bcom rnams-kyi. C. om. sāra.
116) anuşanga, T. ... daň ħbrel-pa (= sambandha), C. THES.
117) prakhyā, T. ... dan mtshuns, C. St ko.
118) garbha-kośa-mala, T. mnal-sbubs dri-ma, c. Ha H. garbhakośa means
uterus.
119)
120)
anugata, T. rjes-ħbrel (=anubaddha), C. & (known).
mahâtman, T. bdag-ñid chen-po, C.
大智諸菩薩,which is not corect.
121) Cf. BGŚ 808 a ko * ET PÅ.
122) C. reads OPEL, gp and connects them
with each of trividha svabhāva, respectively.
[ 283 ]



J. TAKASAKI
forth, is to be understood in the reference to the 3-fold Nature (tri-
vidhaḥ svabhāvaḥ) of the Matrix of the Tathāgata 123). What is the 3-fold
Nature?
The Nature of this [Essence] is the Absolute Body,
The Reality, as well as the Germ,
Which is known by the examples,
Three, one and five, [respectively). // 144 //
By the 3 examples, i.e. those of the image of the Buddha, honey
and the kernel [of grains), this Essence is to be understood as being
of the nature of the Absolute Body (dharmakāya-svabhāva). By one
example, i.e. that of gold, its being of the nature of Reality (tathathā-
svabhāva), and by [the remaining] 5 examples, i.e. those of the treasure,
the tree, the precious image, the highest Lord of Universe, and the
golden statue, its being of the nature of the Germ (gotra-svabhāva)
from which the 3 kinds of Buddha's Body are originated 124) [is to be
understood].
a) Dharmakāya.
Here, how is the Absolute Body?
The Absolute Body is to be known in 2 aspects,
[One) is the Absolute Entity which is perfectly immaculate,
[The other) is its natural outflow 125), the teaching
Of the profound [truth] and of the diverse guidance. // 145 //
The Absolute Body of the Buddha is to be understood in 2 aspects.
[Namely], 1) the perfectly pure Absolute Entity itself (dharmadhātu) 126)
123) C. ETT. The following passage is a detailed explanation of v. 27 and
v. 28 (S. p. 26). It is also to be compared with (I) svabhāva (the first of the 10 meanings
of tathāgatadhātu, S. p. 27).
124) Cf. v. 23 (K. 4) & v. 24, where gotra is explained as the germ of ratnatraya. From
the viewpoint of ekayāna, ratnatraya is ultimately resolved into one buddha-ratna ’.
In this sense, these two different explanations of gotra are identical.
125) nişyanda, T. rgyu-mthun, c. 1 (which is a peculiar translation. Usually,
t'). This is interpreted in the commentary by · tat-prāpti-hetu”.
126) The reading " dharmadhātor avi- ' is to be corrected into · dharmadhātur avi-'.
Both T. & C. read it as nominative.
[ 284 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
which is the acting sphere of Non-discriminative Wisdom; and this is to
be known in the reference to the Truth realized by the Tathāgata through
introspection (pratyātmâdhigama-dharma). And, 2) the natural outflow
of the perfectly pure Absolute Entity (dharmadhātu-nisyanda) as the
cause for its attainment 127), which produces 128) the communication 129)
among other living beings according to their faculties in discipline 130).
And this is to be known in the reference to the Truth as the doctrine
to be taught (deśanā-dharma) 131).
This teaching is again divided into two, owing to the difference of
means for exposition 132) of the Doctrine, whether subtle or extensive 133).
Namely, 2)-1) the Code of Bodhisattva 134), the teaching by the profound
means for exposition 135) of the Doctrine referring to the Highest Truth
(paramārtha-satya), and 2)-2) the Aphorism, the Scripture in prose and
verse, the Prophecy, the Verse, the Solemn Utterance, the Statement
of subject matter, &c. 136) which are the teaching by various kinds of
means for exposition of the Doctrine and are related to the Empirical
Truth (samvști-satya) 137),
Being supermundane, nothing can be given
As an example for the Essence, in this world;
Therefore, it is shown in its similarity
1.
127) In the sense that, by means of deśanā-dharma, sattvas are led to bodhi.
128) prabhava, T. hbyun, c. ff... #j.
129) vijñapti, T. rnam-par rig-pa, C. (?).
130) yathāvainayika is to be corrected into yathāvaineyika. T. gdul-bya ji-Ita-bar.
C. AJ PŁ. So has BGś (Fr 1Ł).
131) See back, the passage on dharmaratna (S. p. 10 ff.) and on saranatraya (S. p. 18,
1. 14 ff.). Of these two divisions of dharma, BGś: IE 1 $ & TER ,
respectively. Also cf. the Mahāyānasamgraha-bhāsya (tr. by Paramārtha), Taisho,
XXXI, p. 268 c: Rp X & JE Æ
132) vyavasthāna, T. rnam-par hjog-pa. C. om, dharmavyavasthānanayabhedāt.
133) sūkşma, T. phra-ba, C. M, & audārika, T. rgya-chen, C. , resp.
134) bodhisattva-pitaka, T. byan-chub-sems-dpaḥi sde-snod, C. WE MEE.
135) T. om. vyavasthāna. c. I... PR for vyavasthāna-naya-deśanā.
136) sūtra, geya, vyākaraṇa, gāthā, udāna, nidāna, respectively. These are the first
6 of dvādaśânga-dharmapravacana (see Mvyut. 62). They are here regarded as the doctrine
for Śrāvaka- and Pratyekabuddhayānika. Cf. BGS: E L j .
137) These two divisions of deśanā-dharma corr
rrespond to nitârtha and neyârtha,
respectively. (Cf. Abhidharmakośa-vyākhyā, Wogihara's Edition, p. 174). Also cf. Lank,
p. 147, 171: siddhānta-naya & deśanānaya.
[ 285 ]



J. TAKASAKI
To the [apparitional form of the] Buddha himself. // 146 //
[The Doctrine] taught by subtle, profound means
Is to be known as being akin to honey of one taste,
And taught by various kinds of means,
As being similar to the kernel of various grains 138). // 147 ||
Thus, by 3 examples, those of the image of the Buddha, the honey
and the kernel, in reference to the meaning that all living beings, with
no exception, are penetrated by the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata 139),
it is explained that “these, all living beings, are the Matrix (interior)
of the Tathāgata 140), (i.e. the Matrix in which the Tathāgata penetrates).
Indeed, there is no one among the living beings 141) who stands outside
the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata 142), just as no kind of physical
form can exist outside of space.
Because it is said 143);
“Just as space is considered to be all-pervading always,
Similarly, it 144) is held to be always all-pervading;
Just as space pervades all visible forms,
Similarly, it pervades all the multitudes of living beings ”.
138) anda-sāra, T. sbubs-sñin (= kośa-sāra), C. (F ** (of different taste).
The meaning of anda here is not clear.
139) Cf. S. p. 26, v. 27 a buddhajñānântargamất sattvarõºeh; v, 28 : sambuddhakaya-
spharaṇāt; & l. 8: sarvasattveșu tathāgata-dharmakāya-parispharaṇârthena.
140) tathāgatasya ime garbhāḥ sarvasattvāḥ. This is the first way of interpreting the
term tathāgatagarbha, regarding this Bahuvrīhi compound as consisting of two words
whose interrelation is the dependent determinative (Tatpuruṣa). Here, ‘garbha' means
'interior’, and hence the compound has the sense of . one who is within the Tathā-
gata'. This meaning comes from the idea of ' antargama of buddhajnāna', i.e. the pene-
tration of the Absolute into everything from inside and this signifies the all-pervadingness
of the Absolute. In this sense, BGś calls this lst meaning · HIT (garbha in the
sense of samgļhita). By the way, T. translates the above sentence into “de-bshin-
gśegs-pași sñin-po-can (being possessed of the essence of the Tathāgata). C. shows no
difference between this and the subsequent other two interpretations j kp * E).
141) sattvadhātu, as a collective noun, the aggregate of living beings. T. & C. as
usual (for dhātu, T. khams, c. 7).
142) C. inserts tathāgatajñānād bahir' after dharmakāyād bahir '. BGŚ regards
this passage as a quotation from some scripture (808 a). Also, see MSbh (P), 252 b.
143) MSA IX, 15 (which has rūpagaña instead of rūpagata).
tat” stands for buddhatva, acc. to the commentary on MSA. For the 2nd
and 4th Pada, C. has a rather free rendering, saying:
* similarly, sattvakāya is indivisible from buddhajñāna', & 'therefore, it is said
that sarvasattvās tathāgatagarbhāḥ ', respectively.
144) 66
[ 286 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhā g a
b) Tathatā.
Being unchangeable, by nature,
Sublime 145), and perfectly pure,
Reality is illustrated
By the analogy with a piece of 146) gold. // 148 //
That which is the Mind, though it is associated with 147) the pheno-
mena 148) of Suffering [caused by] innumerable forms of Defilement, is
unable to be shown as being alterable because of its being radiant by
nature. Therefore, it is called “Reality' in the sense of being unchange-
able like excellent gold. This very Mind gets also the appellation of the
Tathāgata ', whenever it perfects the purification 149) from all accidental
pollutions even in the case of those living beings who are ranked among
the groups in the definitely wrong way, since all of them are not dif-
ferent by nature. Thus, with reference to the sense that Reality is
the undifferentiated whole 150), it is explained by the one example of gold,
that 'the Tathāgata, being Reality, is [identical with] the Matrix (i.e.
the inner essence) of these living beings 151). Having in view [this] Innate
Mind, the pure and non-dual Essential Nature 152), it is said by the
Lord 153);
145) C. om. kalyāņa. For these three qualities, BGś: 1) PE TER; 2) TJ
Pro HEE3) HF FILE = (808 b).
146) maņdalaka, T. gzugs (= rūpa), C. om.
147) anugata, T. rjes-su ḥbrel. C. om. the whole sentence.
148) T. om. dharma.
149) viśuddhim āgatas. An etymology of the term tathāgata. See the quotation below.
150) Cf. S. p. 26, v. 27: tam-nairmalyasyâdvayatvāt, v. 28: tathatā’vyatibhedataḥ,
and 1. 8: tathāgata-tathatā’vyatibhedârthena.
151) tathāgatas tathatā eșām garbhaḥ sarvasattvānām. This is the second interpretation
of the term tathāgatagarbha, in which the two words tathāgata and garbha are related appo-
sitionally to each other, i.e. garbha being tathāgata. Here the word garbha means essence,
i.e. tathatā which is represented by tathāgata. Because of this identification with tathatā,
tathāgatagarbha is called “ samalā tathatā’. The difference, if there is any, between tathā-
gata and tathāgatagarbha is merely in their appearance, the former being “ śuddhim āgatā
tathatā', i.e. ónirmalā tathatā' and the latter being ‘ samalā tathatā’. From this point,
tathāgatagarbha is a special name for tathatā when it is hidden by (or covered with) kleśas.
In this sense, BGś calls this second interpretation BiB (garbha in the form
of upagūdha).
152) C. reads this passage curiously as that “cittapraksti, though it is śuddhi, still
is advayadharma by nature; therefore...
153) JAA 247 a.
6
[ 287 ]



J. TAKASAKI
“Here, O Mañjusri, the Tathāgata is one who has the full know-
ledge about the root of his own substratum 154). Through his self-
purification, he has understood 155) the purity of living beings. That
which is the purity of his own and that which is the purity of
the living beings, these two are one and the same, they cannot be
divided into two 156).
[Also) it is said 157),
Though being undifferentiated among all,
Reality, in case the purification is perfected,
Is [called] Buddhahood; therefore,
All living beings are possessed of the Matrix of Buddhahood”.
c) Tathāgatagotra.
The Germ [of the Buddha) is known to be twofold,
Being like a treasure and like a tree (grown] from a seed;
The Innate 158) [Germ] existing since the beginningless time
And that which has acquired the highest development 159). // 149 //
From this twofold Germ, it is considered 160),
The 3 Bodies of the Buddha are obtained ;
From the first one, the first Body,
And, from the second, the latter two 161). || 150 ||
155)
156)
164) ātmôpādānamüla, T. bdag-gi ñe-bar len-pași gshi-rtsa, c. R *
¥9) BGś # LX TR *. For parijñātāvin, T. as protected by parijñā’, BGŚ
Ed. It seems that to know ātma-upādāna means to purify his mind”.
anugata, T. rtogs-pa (=āgata), C. £.
kāro ti’ should gramatically be “kāreti ’.
157) MSA IX, 37.
168) prakſtistha (-gotra), T. ran-bshin gnas-pa, c. U. Cf. BGś
E PE. BGś gives 6 points of similarity of prakſtistha-gotra to a treasure,
but they are exactly identical with those in Ratná. v. I, 22 (S. p. 20) where ratnatraya is
referred to.
160) samudānita (-gotra), T. yan-dag blan-ba, c. ETT SEE] İ. Cf. BGś 5 |
UE. As for these two kinds of “gotra ’, see BBh p. 3. MSA III, 4. comm.
(prakſtistha, paripușta or samudānita).
160) The reading matā’ is acceptable in the light of T. & C. T. thob-par ḥdod-pa
yin (prāptir matā), c. .
161) From this statement, dharmakāya seems to be divided into two: one is dhar-
[ 288 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
The Body of the Absolute Essence 162) is pure
And is known to be like the precious image,
Since, by nature, it is non-artificial 163)
And is the substratum 164) of precious properties. // 151 ||
The [Body of] Enjoyment 165) is like the Universal Lord
Since it is the great Emperor of Religion 166);
The Apparitional Body 167) is like a golden statue
Since is has the nature of being an image 168). || 152 ||
Thus, by these 5 examples, namely, those of a treasure, a tree, a
precious image, a Lord of the Universe, and a golden statue, in the refer-
madhātu or tathatā which is called here the first body, and the other, dharmakāya as bodhi,
i.e. the result of purification of dhātu, which is included in the second kāya being (sva-)
sambhogakāya. In other words, it signifies the separation of jñāna from dharmakāya
remaining the latter as pure reality or truth. This point is, however, not clear in this
text, and in a later passage dharmakāya is spoken of as being the truth inseparable from
wisdom (Chaps. II, III). It was BGś which, basing itself on this passage, made this point
clear and regarded sambhogakāya as a part of dharmakāya being svasambhoga.
162) svābhāvika-kāya, T. ro-bo-ñid-sku, c. £ $ (BGś X$).
163) akrtrima, T. byas-min, C. T ty (unchangeable).
164) āśraya, T. gter (= nidhi), C. T Th Tf 9). Cf. BGś FIT
# . BGś mentions 4 kinds of similarity of dharmakāya to gold. Of them, the
first three are the same as those mentioned here, the last one is called Fun
T 1. (sama-prāpta), which means that anybody can obtain dharmakāya, just as gold
does not belong to any particular person (KU TE VJ ! , # #1) (808 c).
165) sâmbhoga, T. rdsogs-lons, C. om.,
BGS 應身,
166) For · mahādharmâdhirājatvād’, T. reads chos chen rgyal-srid-du ldan phyir '
(mahādharmâdhirājyatvād ”). Probably it is a better reading. c. £ EN
(attaining the position of a great religious king). BGŚ gives 4 qualities to this kāya, viz.
1) # ili (based upon the former merit); 2) IE # (= 1, prāptavya); 3) TE
! (= TE 15, prāpta); and 4) E E (sambhoga) and regards each of these
qualities as being correspondent to that of cakravartin.
167) nirmāna, T. sprul-ba, c. IŁ 7, BGś 1 $. The same terminology on
trikāya is used in MSA (IX, 59): svabhāva-dharmasambhoga-nirmāņair, ibid., 60:
svābhāviko tha sāņbhogaḥ kāyo nairmāņiko.
168) pratibimba, T. gzugs-brñan, c. . BGś maintains 3 characteristics of nir-
māņa, through which the similarity to pratibimba is observed: 1) #jt (having appa-
ritional form); 2) IH JI (produced by ‘ praņidhāna (therefore, artificial); 3) Hajt
# AS (having beginning and end, therefore, not eternal) (808 c).
[ 289 ]



J. TAKASAKI
6
ence to the nature as the Germ from which the 3 Bodies of the Buddha
are originated 169), it is said that “the Matrix (i.e. the inner essence)
of these living beings is the Essence (i.e. the cause) of the Tathāgata '170).
Indeed, the Buddhahood is usually manifested 171) in the 3 Bodies of the
Buddha. Hence, it is said that the Essence of the Tathāgata is the cause
for the acquisition of these [3 Bodies]. Here, the word dhātu' (essence)
is especially used in the sense of hetu' (a cause) 172). So it is said 173):
“And now, in every living being, there exists the Essence of the
Tathāgata arisen, in the form of embryo 174). But these living beings
do not know about it "
nce to the Abhidharma-sūtra on the “ Essence ?) 175).
.
169) Cf. S. p. 26, v. 27: bauddhe gotre tatphalasyôpacārāt, v. 28: gotrataḥ, and 1. 8–9:
tathāgatagotrasambhavarthena.
170) tathāgatadhātur eşām garbhaḥ sarvasattvānām. This is the third interpretation
of the term tathāgatagarbha, 'garbha ' here means inner essence (dhātu), being the cause
(hetu) from which the Tathāgata is arisen. This stands for the original sense of the term
tathāgatagarbha.
BGS
gives a name
of . E leht E. " (garbha in the sense of samgrahaka,
i.e. that which contains the Tathāgata).
171) prabhāvita, T. rab-tu phye-ba, c. 1 * # (has got the appellation).
172) Throughout this text, those terms, garbha, gotra, and dhātu, are used synony-
mously, being possessed of the meaning of 'hetu'. And this hetu means “āśraya' as will
be explained.
173) The source of this quotation is not yet identified. C. om. this quotation. The
idea is close to the Avatamsakasūtra.
174) garbhagata, T. sñin-por gyur-pa.
175) A quotation from the Mahāyāna-abhidharmasūtra, of which no S., T. or C.
version is available now. This Sūtra is regarded as one of the important sources of the
Vijñānavāda and often quoted in the works of that theory. As for this verse, it is quoted
in the Mahāyānasamgraha-bhāșya of Vasubandhu (MS bh (P), p. 157 a) and also in Sthira-
mati's commentary on the Trimşikā of Vasubandhu (Skt., ed. par Sylvain Lévi, p. 37).
In these two cases, the word dhātu is applied to ālāyavijñāna. One interesting point to
be noted is that, in the case of Trimsikābhāșya, dhātu is translated by “dbyins ’ in T. and
by in C., instead of by “khams' and as in this text. The different way
of
translation seems to show the difference of meaning implied by these different theories.
But as a matter of meaning in each language, the distinction is not so clear. In the
case of C.,
means originally 'boundary’ ‘sphere of certain limited extent ’,
and derivatively, 'region', 'universe' and is usually used for the 'dhātu' of dharmadhātu,
nirvāṇadhātu, lokadhātu, traidhātuka, or sattvadhātu. At the same time, is used
for dhātu of skandha-dhātv-āyatana, prthividhātu, ākāśadhātu, etc. showing the sense of
"element'. This last sense cannot be derived from the Chinese word, but is merely
a translation of the Skt. word dhātu. On the other hand, the Chinese word has
a sense of nature, character', 'essence' or sex. It is usually used for the tran-
[ 290 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
Indeed, it is said [in the Scripture) as follows:
The Essence that exists since beginningless time
Is the foundation of all the elements,
Owing to its existence, all Phenomenal Life 178)
As well as the acquisition of Nirvāņa exists".
Here, how is it that “it exists since beginningless time’? With refe-
rence to this very Matrix of the Tathāgata, it has been taught and ascer-
tained by the Lord : 66 An initial limit is not to be perceived ” 177).
About the 'Essence’, it is said as follows
“O Lord, this Matrix of the Tathāgata is the transcendental
Matrix; the Matrix, perfectly pure by nature"
178):
slation of such Skt, words as 'svabhāva', 'prakſti' and '-tā', '-tva', affixes showing
an abstract sense. To translate dhātu into + as in this text is a rather peculiar
case. But it is quite suitable here is also used for “gotrahere, which is usually
replaced by E). In short, of and as translations of Skt. dhātu, the former
shows the meaning of something spatial, while the latter, of something internal or essential.
he case of Tibetan, the distinction between “dbyins' and “khams ’ is not so clear
as between the two C. translations. Both Tibetan words have a similar sense of 'place'
or “region', but as the translation of Skt. dhātu, the former is used in the cases of dhar-
madhātu, nirvāṇadhātu, and ākāśadhātu, while the latter, in the cases of lokadhātu, the
4 elements other than ākāśadhātu, 18 component elements, sattvadhātu, and in this text,
the tathāgatadhātu of which we are now speaking. Originally 'khams' seems to relate
to the human body in the sense physical state of body’ or sometimes “body' itself,
and derivatively to things smaller than the human body, like each of 18 elements, and
also to worldly things in general. On the contrary, 'dbyins' always relates to something
transcendental or heavenly. But this distinction is not absolutely fixed. As far as this
text is concerned, C. shows a better and clearer distinction between the two senses of the
word dhātu.
176) gati, T. hgro, C. i .
177) C. regards this whole sentence as a quotation from śMS (cf. ŚMS 222 6: · tHE ,
ÆJE * # ko * , D ku k PC V T T SEN ). Originally
this formula is an explanation of samsāra (cf. SN, II, 178, 193, etc. See Note VIII-
(VII)–242, on anavarágra). It is ŚMS which has inserted' tathāgatagarbham adhikrtya' to
this famous formula for the first time in order to show that the tathāgatagarbha is the
basis of samsāra. Cf. MSbh (P), p. 157 a. (Quotation is apparently from SN).
178) ŚMS 222 b, where two other epithets are given of the tathāgatagarbha which
are mentioned in C. (the parents, ko * # # , # , &
HEE WE, P. These four, viz. dharmadhātu-garbha, dhar-
makāya-g., lokottara[-dharma]-g., and prakſtiparisuddha(-dharma)-g. are used in a later
passage (S. p. 76, 1. 16 ff.) as corresponding to 4 kinds of people. BGŚ mentions them
[ 291 )
20



J. TAKASAKI
6
The foundation of all the elements’ means
as fol-
The statement
lows 179):
Therefore, O Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata is the foundation,
the support, and the substratum 180) of the immutable elements
(properties) 181) which are essentially connected with, indivisible
from [the Absolute Entity], and unreleased from Wisdom 182)
[At the same time], this very Matrix of the Tathāgata is also, O
Lord, the foundation, the support, and the substratum of the world-
ly] elements that are produced by causes and conditions, which
are by all means disconnected, differentiated [from the Absolute
Essence), and separated from Wisdom 183).
The statement ‘Owing to its existence, there is all the Phenomenal
Life' means as follows 184):
“ Owing to the existence of the Matrix of the Tathāgata, there is
Phenomenal Life, this, O Lord, is the proper saying on account
of the Phenomenal Life 185).
796b).
;
along with tathāgatagarbha as the 5 meanings of garbha
(f1 7
Paramārtha makes use of this 5-fold meaning of garbha established in BGS twice
in his translation of MS-bhāşya: once explaining dhātu', i.e. in the passage equivalent to
this Ratna. passage (MSbh (P), 157 a), and another, explaining dharmadhātu' (ibid.
264 b). Also, we have another modified application of this set of meanings to the explan-
ation of 'svabhāva’ of trisvabhāva (parikalpita and others) in the Hsien-shih-lun (he
translated by him. This theory is unique to those works translated by Para-
mārtha, and its originality seems to be due to Paramārtha himself.
179) ŚMS 222 6. Cf. MSbh (P) 157 a (Q. from ŚMS).
180) niśraya, T. gnas, c. ft; ādhāra, T. gshi, c. ##; pratişthā, T. rten, c. 3 JL,
respectively. C. has one more word #' after **', but C. tr., of ŚMS does not
have it,
181) For dharma, C. (Buddha's Properties). C. adds acintya and some more
adjectives.
182) amuktajñāna, T. bral mi-ses-pa, c. The (not separated from jñāna).
183) asambaddha, vinirbhāgadharma, muktajñāna, resp. These terms are used as
adjectives to samskyta-dharmas in contrast with sambaddha, avinirbhāgadharma, amukta-
jñāna in case of asamskļda-dharmas, i.e. buddhadharmas.
184) ŚMS 222 b. Cf. MSbh (P) 157 a (Q. from ŚMS).
186) The reading “iti parikalpam asya vacanāyềti' is doubtful. C. reads
R' (this is called a good saying), which agrees with C. tr. of ŚMS. T. reads for the
whole sentence 'de-bshin-gśegs-paḥi sñin-po mchis-na (tathāgatagarbhe sati), de-la ḥkhor-
ba shes tshig-gis gdags-pa lags-so (samsāra iti vacanena asya prajñaptam)'. On the other
hand, T. tr. of SMS says: mchis-na, ḥkhor-ba shes mchi-na ni, tshig de rigs-pa
[ 292 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
The statement . There is also the acquisition of the Nirvāṇa’ is said
in the following sense 186):
“O Lord, if there were no Matrix of the Tathāgata, there would
not take place aversion to Suffering, or arise desire, earnest wish,
or prayer for Nirvāṇa”. &c.
lags-so (... samsāra iti yuktam etad vacanam). At least the Skt. reading should be cor-
rected into . iti parikalpitam...', but parikalpitam probably means here 'prajñaptam'
as given by T. But ŚMS shows better sense, so I read it according to ŚMS.
186) ŚMS 222 b. Cf. MSbh(P) 157 a (Q. from ŚMS).
[ 293 )



X. THE ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MATRIX
OF THE TATHAGATA
§ 1. The Saying: All Living Beings are Possessed of the Matrix of the
Tathāgata is the Highest Logical Truth.
Now, this Matrix of the Tathāgata, being united with 1) the Abso-
lute Body, having the characteristics inseparable from Reality, and being
of the nature of the germ properly fixed [towards the attainment of the
Buddhahood]”, exists everywhere, at whatever time and without exception 3)
among the living beings, this is indeed to be perceived in the light of the
Absolute Essence as the [highest] logical ground 4). It is said 5):
O noble youth, such is the essential nature of the elements 6).
Whether the Tathāgatas appear in this world, or whether they do
>
as
1) avipralambha. The reading is not clear. In comparison with two other epithets,
i.e. those relating to tathatā and gotra which stand for trividhasvabhāva along with dhar-
makāya, this word has to express an idea similar to ' parispharaṇa'. T. reads this passage
dharmakāyal-vat) vipulaḥ
and C., H * £ $ (probably T
Sl) is connected with tathatā and is a translation of asambhinna). We can get some
idea from T. reading, though it is probably caused by a misreading. C.
(atyanta) is also not the proper translation at all. On the other hand, M. W. records a
sense of disunion' for vipralambha as taken from Wilson's vocabulary. If the reading
is correct the only meaning which can construe the sentence would be “not disunited ',
i.e. united with '. (In this case, avipralabdha would be better than avipralambha).
2) niyatagotra-svabhāva, T. nes-paủi rigs-kyi ran-bshin, c. * É U PN.
3) nirava seşa-yogena, T. khyad-par med-pași tshul-du, c. The f. (khyad-par
med-pa' nirviseșa.)
4) dharmatăm pramāņikſtya, T. chos-ñid tshas-mar byas-nas, c. # # *. It
* dharmatā is pramāņa, i.e, only the truth is the authority for knowledge ?.
6) TGS 547 c.
6) dharmāņām dharmatā, c. ut PXW PRETÈ, TGS #
0
means
[ 294 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
not", these living beings are always possessed of the Matrix of the
Tathāgata"
That which is meant by this “ essential nature' (dharmatā) is here
synonymous for 8) the argument' (yukti), the mode of proof (yoga)
and the means [of cognition] (upāya) º), in the sense: such is the real
state of things and not otherwise 10). In any case only the Absolute Es-
sence is the resort 11) for the contemplation of the mind 12), only the
Absolute Essence is the argument for the proper understanding 13) of
7) utpādād vā tathāgatānām anutpādād vā. This expression is quite popular since
the Pāli Canon. For instance, SN vol. 2, p. 25:
jāti paccayā, bhikkhave, jarāmaraṇam, uppādā vā tathāgatānam anuppādā vā
tathāgatānam, țhitā va sā dhātu dhamma-tthitatā dhamma-niyāmatā idappaccayatā”.
In this example, the emphasis is on idappaccayatā (Skt. idampratyayatā pratītya-
samutpāda) as the eternal truth (dhātu, fem. in Pāli). In a similar manner, this expression
is here used for emphasizing the garbha theory as the eternal truth. BGŚ has a similar
quotation regarding it as from the Sandhinirmocanasūtra, saying:
如解節經說佛告無盡意菩薩善男子如來性者
是真實論 若如來出世及不出世,性相常然非虛
E (812 a).
Actually, however, we have no equivalent passage in the present text of the Sand-
hinirmocana, except for a reference to "dharmadhātu-sthititā' being dharmatā-naya'
XE DE), where the phrase “ utpādād vā tathāgatānām anuntpādād vā’ is used.
(de-la de-bshin-gśegs-pa rnams byun yan run/ma byun yan run ste/chos gnas-par bya-
baḥi phyir, chos-ñid dbyins gnas-pa-ñid gan-yin-pa de-ni chos-ñid-kyi rigs-pa yin-no)
(E. Lamotte's Ed. p. 258) ÆTÍ, N * # #TU,
PELE, E .
Also see Lank. p. 143, where the eternity of truth is called “dharmadhātu-sthititā”.
paryāya. Both T. & C. have no translation of this word. So I take it as a predicate.
») T. rigs-pa, sbyor-ba & thabs; C. Æ t pe to land om. yukti.
( seems to be a repeated translation of dharmatā).
evam eva tat syāt/ anyathā naîva tat syāt. C. adds: “it is therefore acintya.
11) pratiśarana, T. rtogs-pa (= adhigama), c. fi (ore). C. reads for · dharmataiva
pratiśaranam, dharmataîva yuktis ’, • # , # # # #
12) citta-nidhyāpana (nidhyāpana fr. ni v dhyai, to observe, meditate), T. sems
ñe-bar rtogs-pa, C. . This corresponds to pratiśarana.
13) citta-samjñāpana, T. sems yan-dag-par ses-pa (T. takes sam- in the sense of
samyak-), C. (citta-pariſuddha). T. gives the best sense. This corresponds to
yukti.
8)
10)
[ 295 ]



J. TAKASAKI
the mind. This essence itself is not accessible to imagination nor to
discrimination. It is accessible only to faith 14).
§ 2. The 4 Kinds of Individuals to Whom the Faith in this Essence is
Necessary 15)
The Highest Truth of the Buddhas 16)
Can be understood only by faith,
Indeed, the eyeless one cannot see
The blazing disk of the sun 17). // 153 //
In brief, there are four kinds of individuals who are defined as being
blind 18) with regard to the perception of the Matrix of the Tathāgata.
Who are these four ? They are namely: 1) the ordinary beings; 2) the
Śrāvakas; 3) the Pratyekabuddhas; and 4) the Bodhisattvas who have
recently entered the Vehicle 19). It is said 20);
“O Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata is not the accessible sphere
for those who have fallen into the erroneous conception maintaining
the existence of individuality 21), for those who are attached to
delusion 22), and for those whose mind has deviated from the
conception of Non-substantiality" 23).
16)
14) Acc. to T. & C., the reading of this sentence is preferably corrected into the
following:
... na vikalpayitavyā [kevalam tv] adhimoktavyệti 1.
(T. ħbaḥ-shig-tu, c. 1. C. om. cintayitavyā.
15) Cf. BGś 812 a ff., where the 4 kinds of people are connected with the 4 synonyms
for dharmakāya, viz. dharmakāya, tathāgata, paramârthasatya and nirvāṇa, respectively.
See VIII-X). Cf. MSbh (P) 258 b-c. (Commenting of MSA verse quoted.)
svayambhū. T. reads paramârtha as the subject (śraddhyaîvânugantavyaḥ para-
mârthaḥ svayambhuvām /). C. reading is uncertain but reads paramârtha as a locative and
connects it with śraddhā (paramârthe śraddhā...), and om. anugantavya. Here the
translation is acc. to T.
11) CF. ŚMS 222 a: Wyn TTLE ŁBUT,
18) acakşumat, c. 4 i (jātândha).
19) navayāna-samprasthita, T. theg-pa-la gsar-du shugs-pa, C. HIJ HELS
(nava-bodhicitta).
20) ŚMS 222 a.
21) satkāyadřşti-patita, T. hjig-tshogs-la lta-bar lhur-ba, C.
HEJ.
22) viparyāsâbhirata, T. phyin-ci-log-la mnon-par ķdod-pa, C. LX PLU 1
e].
śūnyatā-vikșipta-citta, T. ston-pa-ñid-las sems rnam-par gyeńs-pa, C.
散亂
*.
23)
[ 296 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
Here, “those who have fallen into the erroneous conception mainta-
ining the existence of individuality' are the ordinary beings. Indeed,
having fully 24) admitted 25) those elements classified into [5] groups and
others, which are possessed of Evil Influences 26), as being the real Ego
and its belongings, they are clinging to the conception of “Ego' and
* Mine ’27), and, due to this conception, they cannot believe even in the
Immaculate Essence which represents the annihilation of the (conception
of the existence of real individuality 28). Being so, how is it possible
for them to cognize the Matrix of the Tathāgata which is the object
accessible only to the Omniscient ? There is [absolutely] no room
for it.
Now, those who are attached to delusion' represent 2) the Śrāva-
kas and 3) the Pratyekabuddhas. Why? Because, although the Matrix
of the Tathāgata is to be considered as “eternal ’ in its transcendental
sense 29), they indulge in the contemplation of the evanescence' [of the
phenomena 30)] instead of meditating upon the “eternity' of the former.
Likewise, although the Matrix of the Tathāgata is to be considered as
'blissful' in its transcendental sense, still they indulge in the contempla-
tion of the suffering' [of the phenomena) instead of meditating upon
the bliss' of the former. Although the Matrix of the Tathāgata is to
be regarded as the [highest] Unity', they nevertheless cling to the prac-
tice of meditation on the idea of “non-Ego’ [of the separate elements]
instead of concentrating their mind on the notion of the Unity of the
former. And, though the Matrix of the Tathāgata is to be considered
as “pure’ in the transcendental sense, they devote themselves to the
practice of meditation on the notion of the “impurity' [of the Pheno-
menal World] without doing meditation on Purity' of the former. Thus,
25)
24) The reading should be atyantam (adv.), instead of atyanta, in the text.
upagamya, T. khas-blañs-nas, C. H.
26) C. om. sāsrava. C. seems to read “atyantâbhūta-rūpâdi-skandhān dharmān'
(THE IT BETE).
27) ahamkāra & mamakāra, T. nar-ḥdsin-pa & ña-yir ḥdsin-pa,
c. # # When
28) satkāya-nirodha (as an adjective to anāsravadhātu), T. hjig-tshogs ḥgag-pa,
C. 離身見等滅論 (nirodhasatya represented by the removal of satkāyadſşti,
etc.). For anāsravadhātu, C. THERE, and adds uŹ (amſta-dharma).
20) uttari bhāvayitavya, T. bsgom-par bya-ba, C. PER LE TT (T. & C. om. uttari),
' uttari' as a preceding part of a compound has a sense of 'further, beyond', etc. (BHS
Dic. s. v.). So it seems not to have so important sense in this compound.
30) C. inserts sarvadharmeșu. The sense is that those people know only about ani-
tyatā of sarvadharma, but cannot notice nityatva of tathāgata behind the phenomena.
[ 297 ]



J. TAKASAKI
in such a way, all the Srāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas are attached to
the Path which is quite opposite 31) to the realization of the Absolute
Body, and hence the Essence [of the Tathāgata] which is characterized
as the Supreme Eternity, the Supreme Bliss, the Supreme Unity, and the
Supreme Purity, is said not to be accessible to them, too.
About 32) this inaccessibility of the Essence to those who are attached
to delusion, i.e. who have the notion of Evenescence, Suffering, Imperso-
nality and Impurity (as the almighty maximum], the Lord has made
it clear 33) in detail in the Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra with the example
of a jewel in the water of a pond. It runs as follows 34);
“Suppose, for instance, O monks, that in the hot season, the people,
putting on the bathing underwear 35), were playing in the water with
various ornaments and equipments for their individual pastime
36)
Suppose then, someone would cast 37) into the water the genuine 38)
Vaidūrya stone. Thus, in order to get this Vaidūrya stone, all the
people, leaving aside their ornaments, would dive into the water.
They would mistake pebbles and gravels in the pond for the real
jewel, seize them and draw them out, thinking: I have got a
jewel. After having stood 39) on the bank of the pond, they would
notice: It is not the real jewel at all! At that moment, the water
of that pond would, owing to the power of that jewel, shine
as if water itself were shining, and seeing that water sparkling,
they would say: 0 the jewel is still there [in the water), and
would notice how that jewel had great quality 40). Thereafter, one
who is experienced and clever would really get the jewel out.
In the same way, 0 brethren, ye who are ignorant of the real
31) vidhura, T. ... dan ḥgal-ba. C. has no literal translation.
32) Better to change the paragraph after “yathā ca sa viparyāsa (S. p. 74, 1, 19).
33) prasādhita, T. rab-tu bsgrubs, C. HÆ.
34) MPS 377 c-378 a.
35) salila-bandhana, T. khrus-ras (bath-cloth), C. om. This compound word seems
to have not been recorded anywhere else.
36) svaiḥ svaiḥ maņdanakôpabhogair. T. ran-ran-gi rgyan dan ñe-bar spyod-pa
dag-gis, C. HE HAS (playing bathing and boating). The concrete idea is
uncertain. T. reads“ mandanaka (= alankāra) and upabhoga (any equipment for pastime)'.
Here I followed T. reading.
37) sthāpayati, T. gshag-pa. But c. # (has lost by mistake).
38) jātya, T. rigs dan Idan-pa, C. (1).
39) T. reads as “dộstvã’ instead of sthitvā. But S. shows a clearer sense.
40) C. om. “aho maņir iti guņa-samjñā pravartate’ and instead has just as one
sees the moon in the sky'.
[ 298 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
essence of things 41), maintaining the general conception that all
things are evanescent, that there is only suffering, and that everyth-
ing is impersonal and impure, practise the meditation [on that
conception] repeatedly, and increasingly. But all that was attemp-
ted 42) by you, [ye should keep in mind], is [in reality] of no use.
Therefore, O monks, ye should become skilful in order not to be
determined by this [false conception] like the pebbles and gravels
in the pond. O monks, with those elements which ye maintain
to be in every case evanescent, suffering, impersonal, and impure,
and on which ye practise the meditation [on that notion] repeatedly
and increasingly 43), there exists [an essence which represents]
the Eternity, the Bliss, the Purity 44), and the Highest Unity".
Thus should be understood in detail, according to the Scripture, the
teaching of the incorrectness with regard to the feature of the highest
true nature of the elements.
Lastly, those whose mind has deviated from the conception of Non-
substantiality’denotes 4) the Bodhisattvas who have recently entered
the Vehicle, [since] they are deprived of 45) [the cognition of] the Matrix
of the Tathāgata in regard to the true meaning of Non-substantiality 46).
They are the people who look toward Non-substantiality as the medium of
Liberation 47) in order to destroy the substance 48), thinking that the
perfect Nirvāṇa means the Extinction, i.e. the destruction of the elements
[for the Phenomenal Existence] in future 49). There are also some people
44)
41) dharma-tattva. T., as if dharmârtha-tattva’, C. LT (apparently om. dharma).
42) ghațita, T. ñe-bar gshags-pa (= upasthita), c. FIT JE (being accumulated
by practice).
43) C. om. this repetition.
śobha' in the text is a misprint for ' śubha '.
45) vipranasta, T. ñams-pa (disappeared), C. Heyde.
46) tathāgatagarbha-śūnyatârthanaya, T. ston-pa-ñid-kyi tshul-du (šunyatā-nayena,
om. artha) as adverbial use and reads · tathāgatagarbhataḥ vipranaşļāḥ”, c. p *
(sūnyatā-tathāgatagarbhârtha, the meaning that tathāgatagarbha is šūnyatā). What
is meant here is that the garbha theory represents the real meaning of sūnyatā.
47) vimokşa-mukha, c. le M. Cognition of Non-substantiality is one of the
3 vimokşa-mukhas.
48) bhāva-vināśāya, c. LA XV. (things changeable)
is for bhāva.
48) uttarakālam, T. dus phyis. C. reads ' after destroying existence, one can get
nirvāņa’. This conception amounts to the nihilistic view. Cf. BGś hE.
[ 299 ]



J. TAKASAKI
among them who think that there is something substantial called the
Non-substantiality' which is quite different from 'form' and other
[elements], and that is the one which we should understand, upon which
we should meditate, and, fancying 50) Non-substantiality in this way,
they are persuaded of 51) Non-substantiality.
3. The True Conception of the Matrix of the Tathāgata as Representing
Non-substantiality 52).
Then how is what is called here “[the cognition of] the Matrix of
the Tathāgata in regard to the true meaning of Non-substantiality'?
Here there is nothing to be removed
And absolutely nothing to be added;
The Truth should be perceived as it is,
And he who sees the Truth becomes liberated 53). || 154 ||
50) upalambha, T. dmigs-pa, C. 18.
51) pratisarati, T. brten-pa, C. om. Cf. BHS Dic., s. v. This conception represents
the eternalistc view. Cf. BGś w j.
52) The following is actually a part of the explanation on śūnyatāvikașiptacitta'.
Cf. BGŚ 812 6.
53) This is one of the most famous verses in Mahāyanistic literature. Besides this
occurrence in the Ratna., there are 9 occurrences of this verse recorded in Mélanges
chinois et bouddhiques, l. 394. They are:
1) Tibetan version of Pratityasamutpāda-hrdaya-kārikā, v. 7, by Nāgārjuna
(Acc. to Prof. V. V. Gokhale’s report, however, the original Skt text. has merely 5 kārikās,
and hence the authorship of Nāgārjuna for this verse is doubtful. See V. V. Gokhale,
Der Sanskrit-Text von Nāgārjuna's Pratityasamutpādahrdayakārikā, Studia Indologica,
Festschrift für Willibald Kirfel, Bonn, 1955, S. 101 ff.);
2) Nāma-samgiti (Tib.) 6-5, attributed to Nāgārjuna;
3) Sumangala-visāraṇī of Buddhaghosa (in Pāli), part I, 12. (a similar idea attri-
buted to the Buddha;
4) Saundaranandakāvya of Aśvaghoşa, XIII, 44;
5) Abhisamayâlankāra, V, 21, which has a little difference in b. (prakṣeptavyam
na kimcana);
6) Śuklavidarśanā (Bendall Mss.);
7) Bodhisattva-bhūmi, Wogihara's ed. p. 48. (not in verse);
8) Madhyântavibhāga-vyākhyā by Sthiramati (as a quotation, it is identical with
that in the Abhisamayâlankāra);
9) Mahāyāna-śraddhôtpāda, Suzuki's tr., p. 57 (not in verse).
We e now can add one example to this list. BGŚ mentions this verse along with v. 155
as a quotation (812 b), saying:
一法可損無一法可增應見實如實見實得解脫
由客塵故空與法界相離 無上法不空與法界相隨
[ 300 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhā ga
The Essence of the Buddha) is [by nature] devoid 54)
Of the accidental (pollutions] which differ from it;
But it is by no means devoid of the highest properties
Which are, essentially, indivisible from it. // 155 //
What is explained by this? There is no defiling element 55) which
is to be removed from this Essence of the Tathāgata, perfectly purified
by nature, since it is by nature devoid of accidental pollutions. Also,
there is no purifying element which is to be added to it, since it is by na-
ture indivisible from the pure properties [of the Buddha) 56). On ac-
count of this point, it is said [in the Scripture) 57);
“ The Matrix of the Tathāgata is devoid of all the sheath of De-
filements which are differentiated and separated from the Abso-
lute Essence). The Matrix of the Tathāgata is by no means de-
void of the Buddha's Properties which are indivisible, inseparable
[from the Absolute Essence], inconceivable and far beyond the
sands of the Gangā in number ”.
Thus, wherever something is lacking, this is observed 58) as 'void' (sūnya)
in that place (tena), whatever remains there, one knows that this being
must exist here 59); This is really the true [conception of Non-substanti-
This is no doubt a quotation from the Ratna. and shows a closer translation of
the original than C. tr. of the same in the Ratna.
In the case of such a verse of widely applicable idea, there was probably a custom
in those days to borrow the same expression without permission or mention of the source
in order to express one's own idea freely, and hence it is not necessary to regard this
v. 154 as a quotation from any particular source. The originality of the Ratna. on account
of this verse lies in its application to the explanation of 'garbha-sūnyatā-arthanaya'
shown in the second verse (v. 155). As for the second verse, cf. DAS 813 b (v. 14).
54) sūnya, T. stoń, C. . This is an original sense of the term sünya. See below.
55) samkleśa-nimitta, T. kun-nas ñon-mons-paủi rgyu-mtshan, C. simply kleśa'.
56) T. inserts dharmată after śuddhadharma.
67) ŚMS 221 c.
58) sam-anupaśyati, T. yan-dag-par rjes-su mthor(-ba), c. gn Tf N.
samyak.
59) yad yatra nâsti tat tena sūnyam iti samanupaśyati / yat punar atrāvasistam
bhavati tat sad ihâstîti yathābhūtam prajānāti 1. T. gan-shig gan-na med-pa de-ni
des ston-ro...gan-shig lhag-par gyur-pa de-ni de-la rtag-par yod-do. (For sad, T.
reads“ sadā”). c. Bo El In IT , EL MATE, RH , kp
Pa, go, jos , ko
kp T L 40 T. Cf. Pāli MN. III, 104-5, etc. (Suññata-vagga, Cū-
sam-
[ 301 ]



J. TAKASAKI
ality] 60). [Thus], by removing the extremities of affirmation and nega-
tion 61), the real 62) characteristic of Non-substantiality is explained by
these two verses.
Now, those individuals whose mind has deviated from this principle
of Non-substantiality, and, turning in various directions 63), neither me-
ditates nor concentrates upon
64) it, we call them by this very reason
those
whose mind has deviated from [the true conception of] Non-substantiality.
Indeed, without the introduction 65) to the knowledge of the highest truth
of Non-substantiality, nobody can attain or realize 66) the non-discrimi-
native Sphere 67) [of the Tathāgata). Implying this point, it has been
said 68):
6
** The Wisdom cognizing the Matrix of the Tathāgata is nothing
but the Wisdom about Non-substantiality of the Buddhas. And
6
lasuññata-sutta)
yam hi kho tattha na hoti, tena tam suññam samanupassati;
yam pana tattha avasittham hoti, tam santam idam atthêti pajānāti.
There are two kinds of
usages
of the term śūnya’: 1) “A is sūnya of B'
(B with instrumental case-ending), as in the case of ' sūnyo dhātuḥ’; 2) ‘B is sūnya
(in A)' (A with locative case-ending, sometimes in BHS with instrumental), as used in
the aphorism mentioned above. The first usage is also observed in the same Pāli canon
(migāramātu pāsādo suñño hatthi-gavâssa-valavena in the preceding illustration),
where the term ' sūnya' (suñña) is to be translated into empty of', 'void of', or
• devoid of'. In the second usage, śünya' is synonymous with na asti' (na hoti),
absent, and this usage relates to the meaning of “ śünya' in Buddhist doctrine as ap-
pearing in the statement: śünyam sarvam'. See Note XI-14. Cf. BBh, p. 48.
60) In the translation, 'true' represents both,“ sam- ' of samanupaśyati and ‘ yathā-
bhūtam.
61) samāropa & apavāda, T. sgro-hgod-pa & skur-pa ħdebs-pa, c. # SHE,
pectively.
62) The reading "aparyantam’ is to be corrected into 'aviparyastam' according
to T. (phyin-ci ma-log-pa) and C. H T, = yathābhūtam).
63) visarati, T. rnam-par hphrol (hphrol fr. bral-ba, to separate). C., instead of
cittam vikșipyate visarati’, simply
Ti to be (ayogyam), and for sūnyatârtha-
nayād, le : (buddhagocaravişayād).
64) ekâgri bhavati, T. rtse-gcig-tu ... hgyur-ba, C.
U. It signifies cittaikâgratā
(L)
66) T. om. mukha.
66) sākṣāt V kļ, T. mnon-par ḥdu-bya-ba (= abhisamayati, abhisameti), c. L.
67) avikalpa-dhātu, C. THE SI T. inserts śuddha between two and
for dhātu, dbyins.
88) ŚMS 221 c.
res-
6
[ 302 ]



The Ratnagotravibhā g a
this Matrix of the Tathāgata has never been seen, has never been
realized by the Śrāvakas and the Pratyekabuddhas 69)” &c.
Now, this Matrix of the Tathāgata, inasmuch as it represents the
Matrix of the Absolute Essence, is said to be a sphere not accessible to
* those who have fallen into the erroneous conception maintaining the
existence of individuality ’, because the Absolute Essence is an antidote
against such erroneous conception 70). Inasmuch as it represents the Ma-
trix of the Absolute Body, or the Matrix of the Transcendental Element,
it is said not to be accessible to those who are attached to delusion ’,
since the Transcendental Element is spoken of as being an antidote aga-
inst the mundane elements of such nature as evanescence, etc. [Further-
more], inasmuch as it represents the Matrix of the properties, perfectly
pure by nature, [the Matrix of the Tathāgata) is said not to be accessible
to · those whose mind has deviated from Non-substantiality', since the
[Buddha's] pure virtuous Properties 71), being represented by the Trans-
cendental Absolute Body which is indivisible from them, are by nature
devoid of accidental pollutions.
Here, to perceive that the Transcendental Absolute Body is perfectly
pure by nature, by means of the cognition of the unique 72) introduction
to the Wisdom which is essentially connected with the Absolute Essence,
implies here the True Intuition 73). On account of this perception, it is
said that [even] those Bodhisattvas who are abiding in their 10 Stages
69) C. adds a few sentences more which are not available in the present ŚMS
except for the passage “ only the Buddha can obtain it’ and are probably an insertion
by the translator.
70) Hereafter, the commentator tries to combine the 4 meanings of tathāgatagarbha
mentioned in ŚMS (see Note IX-178) with the 4 kinds of people to whom the former 4
have the power of being pratipaksa, respectively:
1) dharmadhātugarbha is not accessible to satkāyadęstipatitāḥ;
2) dharmakāya-[garbha], and
3) lokottaradharmagarbha are not accessible to viparyāsâbhiratāḥ;
4) prakſtiparisuddhadharmagarbha is accessible to sūnyatāvikșiptacittāḥ.
For 1) dharmadhātu, T. as “ dharmakāya ’; in 3) T. & C. om. dharma; in 4), instead
of prakrti, T. as dharmakāya, and C. adds sūnya, tathāgata, dharmadhātu in place of dharma.
But S. is identical with those mentioned in ŚMS. See note IX-178
not
71)
80
72) ekanaya,
guņa-dharmāḥ, T. yon-tan-gyi chos, C. IH PROX.
T. tshul gcig-po, C.
- DE 0 (ekarasa samarasa).
73) yathābhūta-darśana. T. adds ‘samyak’ before it. T. resolves ‘jñānadarśana'
into “jñānena samdarśanam’. c. pp Til En L and adds 真如 (tathatā) as the
object of darśana.
[303]
1



J. TAKASAKI
can [but] slightly understand the Matrix of the Tathāgata 74). Indeed,
thus it is said 75) :
[O Lord], thou art unable to be seen fully,
Just as here the sun, in the sky with torn clouds 76)
Even by the Saints, of pure intellectual vision,
Since their intellect is still partial;
O Lord, only those whose Wisdom is illimitable
Can completely perceive thy Absolute Body
Which pervades everything knowable
That is infinite like space” 77).
74) C. regards this sentence as a quotation from some Sūtra. Cf. MPS 41 a.
75) C. regards this verse as a commentary verse and adds one verse in the middle
showing the sense that śrāvaka cannot see the Buddha. The source of this quotation is
unknown.
76) chidrâbhra, T. sprin-mthon, C. (thin cloud). T.“ mthon' is to be changed
into ómthons', which means an open space in a dense forest ', hence derivatively,
• slit, small hole', etc.
77) nabhas-tala. For tala, T. dbyins (dhātu). C. for the whole. T. seems to
have failed to catch the meaning of this verse by omitting one pronoun ' te ' in the third
Pada.
[ 304 ]



XI. THE PURPOSE OF INSTRUCTION 1)
[Someone may ask]: If this Essence [of the Buddha) is thus so
difficult to be cognized inasmuch as it is not fully accessible even to
the Saints of the Highest rank who are abiding on the Stage characterized
as being completely free from any attachment 2), then what is the use
of this instruction to the ignorant and ordinary beings ? [For replying
to this question], we have two ślokas summarizing the purpose of instru-
ction 3). [Of them), one is the question, and the second is the answer 4).
(Kārikās 58–59)
It has been said here and there [in the Scriptures]
That all things are to be known everywhere
As being' unreal', like clouds, [visions in) a dream, and illusions 5);
Whereas, why has the Buddha declared here
That the Essence of the Buddha 6) • exists ’ in every living being
// 156 //
There are 5 defects (caused by the previous teaching]:
The depressed mind”, contempt against those who are inferior 8),
Clinging to things unreal "), speaking ill of Truth 10),
1) C. t Cf. BGŚ 787 a-b (Nidāna-parivarta), 811 b.
2) C. adds: “it is accessible only to sarvajña'.
3) deśanā-prayojana, T. bstan-paḥi dgos-pa, C. Con n.
4) vyākaraņa (explanation), T. lam bstan-pa, C. om.
5) Especially in the Prajñāpāramitā, which is at the same time the basic scripture
of the Mādhyamikas. Cf. MK, VII, 35:
yathā māyā yathā svapno gandharva-nagaram yathā /
tathôtpādas tathā sthānam tathā bhanga udāhịtam 17.
buddha-dhātu, T. sans-rgyas sñin-po (= buddhagarbha), C.
kp *.
») linam cittam, T. sems shum, c. 55 'U'. See v. 161.
8) hinasattveşv avajñā, T. sems-can dman-la bsñas-pa, c.
B.
See v. 162.
”) abhūtagräha, T. yar-dag mi-Ạdsin (bhūta-agraha), c. E. See
v. 163.
10) bhūtadharmâpavāda, T. yarr-dag chos-la skur, c. 2 (C. re-
gards this bhūtadharma as tathatā or buddhadhātu. See v. 165 a b.
6)
[ 305 ]



J. TAKASAKI
And besides 11), affection for one's self”.
[The teaching about Essence of the Buddha) has been taught
In order that those who are possessed of these defects 12)
Might get rid of their defects. // 157 ||
The meaning of these two ślokas is briefly to be known by the follow-
ing ten verses.
It has been said [in the Scriptures]
All kinds of phenomena, made by causes and conditions
And known in the forms of Defilement, Action and Result 13),
Are, like clouds, etc., deprived of reality 14). // 158 //
The Defilements are like the clouds,
Undertaking of Actions 15) is like the enjoyment 16) in a dream;
Being the Results made by Defilements and Actions,
The Group of elements are like illusions made by magic17). || 159 ||
So has it been ascertained before ';
But now, in this ultimate’ Doctrine 18),
11) adhikaḥ, T. lhag-pa (which is connected to
sneha ').
12) ātmasneha, T. bgag-cag, C. # j Tip # (=ātmadựşti, but it is not the
case here). See v. 165 c d. Of these 5, BGŚ gives the following terms:
1) FT U; 2) Fl; 3) ; 4) TÆ;
5) #
13) klesa-karma-vipāka. "vipāka’ stands for janman or duḥkha. These three are the
principal factors of samsāra or samskstadharmas. See Note VIII–132. Also see vv. I,
56 ff., where vipāka’ is replaced by skandha-dhātv-āyatana.
14) viviktam bhūtakoțișu. C. det for the whole. T. dben-pa (solitary) for vivikta,
and regards bhūtakoți as the subject and reads “ bhūtakoți (the reality) is apart from sam-
skrtam’. From the context, C. reading seems better, since bhūtakoțișu viviktam’here
stands for sūnyam in the Kārikā (usually vivikta is used for denoting purity of mokșa
irvāņa, in the sense 'separation from klešas,). As for the use of bhūtakoți in the
plural, I could not trace it anywhere else.
15) krtyakriya, T. bya-ba-yi las, c. FT 1 ¥.
16) C. om. upabhoga.
17) māyā-nirmita, T. sgyu-ma spral-ba, C. (om. nirmita).
uttara tantra, T. bla-maủi rgyud, C. 究竟論, This is the word which gives
this work its title. Here the term tantra' (for which c. a = śāstra) has nothing to do
with Tantric Buddhism. The meaning is simply doctrine' or philosophy'. Signifi-
cance lies more in the word ' uttara’ than in 'tantra’, since by the term ' uttara’, the author
of the Ratna, declared his aim and the position of this theory in the currency of Buddhist
philosophy. In one sense, this theory is opposite to that of “pūrva', by which is
meant here clearly the doctrine of the Prajñāpāramitã and of the Mülamadhyamaka,
18)
[ 306 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
22),
In order to remove the 5 defects (caused by the previous teaching],
It is shown that the Essence of the Buddha 19) exists. // 160 //
Indeed, if [the people] have not heard of this teaching,
Some of them, being possessed of depressed 20) mind,
May have a fault of self-depreciation 21), and hence,
The Will towards the Enlightenment does never arise in them.
// 161 ||
Even if someone has resolved towards Enlightenment
Then he, being proud of it, saying: I am superior to [others),
Will produce the notion of inferiority for those
Whose mind is not aroused towards Enlightenment. || 162 ||
With him who thinks like that 23)
The true knowledge will never arise, and hence,
He clings to unreal things [as if they were real]
And does not cognize the true meaning. // 163 //
[Indeed] 24), the defects of living beings are unreal
Because they are non-genuine 25) and accidental
19)
20)
6
since the former 'one emphasizes “ šūnyatā’, i.e. unreality of things, while this ‘latter'
one emphasizes “ astitva' of buddhadhātu. In another sense, however, this doctrine is not
against the former, but a real successor of the former, as being the answer '-giver to the
problem which has never been explained before '; in other words, as we had already
known by previous passages, this buddhadhātvastivāda is a synthetic sūnyavāda of
śünya and aśūnya, and hence it is the ultimate'. T. `bla-ma’ shows this sense.
dhātu, T. khams, c. I pp. For these 3 verses, cf. BGś 811 6 (after the
explanation of buddhakāyatraya).
nica, T. shum-pa, c. 55 Ľ = lina.
21) ātmâvajñāna, T. bdag-la brñas-pa, c. #h . This self-depreciation is the
first defect, and towards those people having this defect, BGś says, the Buddha has
taught tathāgatagarbha- asti’.
22) For “ bodhicittôdaye “py asya’, T. reads as bodhicittôdaye yasya’ and relates
this ‘ yasya 'to 'tasya’ of the next verse. But in relation to the preceding verse, the word
api’ is quite necessary, while tasya’ of the next verse can stand for that which is descri-
bed in this v. 162 without any relative pronoun.
This “ self-pride ' is the second defect (lack of the notion of equality'), for removing
it, it is taught that . sarva ’-sattvāḥ tathāgatagarbhāḥ” (BGÁ).
c. & laten (such a man of self-pride). In this 3rd defect, emphasis
lies on the ignorance about tathāgatagarbha, which causes the affection toward the unreal
thing.
24) This verse expresses the true meaning (bhūtârtha). T. as S. but C. puts the word
TA' (does not know) and regards this verse as explaining the 4th defect.
25) kſtrima, T. bcos-ma, C. om. For these two, i.e. krtrimatva & ágantukatva, BGS:
* THE & *
23)
[ 307 ]
21



J. TAKASAKI
But the non-substantiality 26) of such defects is real,
That is, the virtues (of living beings], pure by nature. // 164 //
If a man of intelligence 27) perceives [only]
That the defects (of living beings) are unreal,
And depreciates (their) virtues which are real,
He cannot obtain benevolence 28) by which
One regards (other) living beings as equal to oneself. // 165 ||
On the contrary 29), if one hears of this teaching,
There arises in him great exertion 30)
Respect [for all living beings] as for the Teacher 31)
Intuition, Wisdom 32), and great Benevolence 33);
These 5 properties having become originated, // 166 //
He, being free from (self-] depreciation 34),
Obtaining equal regard [for every body],
26) nairātmya, T. bdag-med-pa. “guna' being opposite to doșa, means the “ emp-
tiness' of doșa, and this is real.
27) dhimat, which represents "navayānasamprasthita-bodhisattva’. He is intelligent
because he can perceive ' doşâbhūtatva ’, but this knowledge is merely one side of the true
knowledge. Consequently, he maintains that there is nothing real, and hence this conception
is nothing but the depreciation of reality'. This 4th defect seems to be the most important
among the 5. It clearly implies the defect caused by certain Mādhyamikas whose position
gave rise to the appellation of 'nāstika’ for Buddhists.
28) maitri, T. byams-pa, C. . The lack of maitri, which is the 5th defect, is the
natural consequence of the 4th defect.
29) Hereafter, referring to the 5 guņas which are the antidotes for the respective
5 doșas. About the 5 guņas, cf. AĀS 469 b-c.
30) prôtsaha, T. spro, C. * II (BGś E h "U) ... (1)
31) śāsty-gaurava, T. ston-pa-bshin gus, C. (BGŚ ) ...(2)
T. catches the meaning better. But the best explanation is given in AĀS, which runs:
於諸眾生生尊重心起大師敬 (having aroused the mind of respect
towards living beings, he produces sāstſgaurava.
32) prajñā (3) & jñāna (4). C. & , (in an opposite order). Here “prajña ·
represents ‘prajñāpāramitā' of the Mādhyamika or “avikalpajñāna’ of the Vijñānavāda,
and its function is said to be the intuition of “ śūnyam sarvam', while 'jñāna', repre-
senting ‘tatprsthalabha-jñāna' being laukika jñāna, has a function of 'manifesting the
reality' (BGś #TA E T.
33) maitri (5)
mahākaruņā (c. D, BGś ). Manifestation of the reality
is for the sake of living beings, that is to say, because of mahākaruņā', hence BGś
interprets that prajñā and mahākaruņā (instead of mentioning of jñāna) are the two
upāyas by means of which one can attain the state of apratisthitanirvāṇa.
34) For niravajya, C. Til (avivarta).
[ 308 ]



The Ratnago tra vibhā g a
Being devoid of defects and possessed of virtues,
Having love, equally for himself and for living beings
Attains the State of Buddha 36) at an early date. || 167 ||
35)
Finished is the first Chapter entitled “the Matrix of the Tathāgata'
in the ANALYSIS OF THE GERM OF THE JEWELS, a Treatise on
the Ultimate Doctrine of the Great Vehicle, with the commentary
[named] the Summary of Meaning of the slokas '37)
.
35) For ātmasattvasamasneha, c. IX - ŁJJ E p
HEX (regarding
all living beings as not being different from himself).
36) buddhatā (= buddhatva, bodhi), T. sans-rgyas-ñid, c. FILE L. WE
(anuttarabuddhabodhi). Cf. BGS , AĀS Bos I F TİL (bodhi-
sattva can enter the avivarta state).
37) ślokârthasamgraha-vyākhyānataḥ. T. om. the ablative case-ending. C. has no
equivalent term. ślokârthasamgraha-vyākhyāna' seems to be the name for the com-
mentary, while • śloka’ stands for the basic Kārikās.
[ 309 ]



CHAPTER II.
THE ENLIGHTENMENT 1)
2. NIRMALĀ TATHATA
XII. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE REALITY FREE
FROM POLLUTIONS
6
We have finished the explanation of the Reality mingled with Pol-
lutions'. Hereafter, we shall speak of the undefiled Reality. Now,
what is this Reality free from Pollutions'? It is that which is called
the Perfect Manifestation of the Basis (i.e. the Germ of the Buddha)'
(aśrayaparivſtti), since, in the Immaculate Sphere of the Buddhas, [this
Reality] is [absolutely] freed from all kinds of pollutions 2). And this
undefiled Reality is to be known in brief in the reference to the 8 cate-
gories) [which show its characteristics]. Then which are the 8 categories ?
[The Buddhahood 4) is] the purity 5), the attainment 6),
The liberation [from obstructions] ”,
The action in behalf of oneself and others 8).
And the foundation 9) of these two kinds of actions ;
1) Cf. AĂS Chapter III (Bodhi-parivarta), 470 c-473 c.
2) AAS 470 c: TË SIE DIE - to je onih
E 1 A (ft for ‘āśrayaparivștti ”).
3) For “ padârtha’, T. simply don' (artha).
4) The whole of this verse seems to be merely a row of technical terms. However,
as all those terms, śuddhi and so forth, show the various aspects of 'buddhatva ’, the term
Buddhahood may be suplied here as the subject term.
5) śuddhi, T. dag, C. ...(1).
") prāpti, T. thob, C. 1... (2). This reminds us of the 'jñānâpti’ in v. I, 3.
?) visamyoga, T. bral-ba, C. ... (3).
•) svaparârtha, T. ran-gshan-don, c. H XIJ... (4).
”) (tad-) đśraya, T. (de-)brten, C. He it.... (5). C. adds · * (yoga) before
[ 310 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhāga
Being profound 10), magnificent and magnanimous,
It (manifests itself] as long as the world exists,
In a manner as it is 11). || 1 ||.
Thus, by this verse 12), these 8 subjects are indicated according to
order; namely: 1) the own nature (svabhāva); 2) the cause (hetu); 3) the
result (phala); 4) the function (karman); 5) the union (yoga); 6) the mani-
festation (vstti); 7) the eternal (nitya), and 8) the inconceivable (acintya)
character [of Manifestation] 13).
1) First of all the Essence [of the Buddhahood), which is called
by the Lord “the Matrix of the Tathāgata’ when it is unreleased from
the sheath of defilements, is to be understood, when it is 'perfectly purifi-
āśraya. The term # has probably no ground in the Ms. used for C. translation.
But in the commentary, C. regards it as the term indicating the fifth subject, and reads
•At it' in connection with the next subject.
10) The reading should be 'gāmbhīrya' instead of “gambhirya’ in the text, and
is to be written without separation from the succeeding“ audārya’ (gāmbhiryaudārya-).
For this 6th category, S. gāmbhiryaudārya-māhātmya, T. zab dan rgya-che dan bdag-ſid-
chen-po, c. t t...(6). Cf. AĀS 472 c, 1) # FT!; 2) ;
3) # potem . BGś 811 a, 1) # ; 2) **, 3) 7) *;
11) For these two categories, S. yāvad kālam, yathā ca tat; T. ji-srid-dus, ji-Ita-ñid;
c. RH B HITTA in the Kārikā text, and 時數如彼法 in the commentary.
(The latter matches S. better). T. om. 'tat'. These two subjects have the same characters
as "yāvadbhāvikatā' and 'yathāvadbhāvikatā' used in the characterization of the Jewel
of the Community (IV-S 1).
12) It is quite doubtful whether this verse belongs to the Kārikā-text, though C.
includes it within the Kārikā-text. One reason is that this verse is merely a row of certain
terms and does not make a sentence by itself. Such is not the case with Kārikā-verses
which we have picked up in Chap. I, and also without this verse, we can understand
the idea expressed in this Chap. II. Another reason is that these terminologies are not
utilized in the following Kārikās at all. With the same probability as for v. 29 in
Chap. I, this verse is to be omitted from the line of Kārikā text. See my Introduction.
13) For these 8 subjects, T. & C. give the following terminologies:
1) no-bo; T.
2) rgyu,
; 3) ḥbras-bu, ; 4) las, #; 5) ldan, !
6) hjug-pa, TT; 7) rtag-pa, ; and 8) mi khyab-pa, The
Cf. AĀS 470 c, which mentions 10 categories, viz. 1) (svabhāva); 2)
(hetu); 3) (paripantha); 4) (phala); 5) IE * (karman); 6) WHE
(yoga); 7) TT (vrtti); 8) (nitya); 9) Ti# (āveņika); 10) TATES ME
(acintya). Of them, the first 4 are identical with the first 3 subjects of 10 categories on
* tathāgatadhātu' in Chap I, while the latter 6 agree in their contents with those (4)-(8)
in this chapter (9th is a part of 'yoga' here). See Note VIII-8.
[ 311 ]



J. TAKASAKI
ed’ (viếuddhi) 14), as the 'own nature' of the [Reality) characterized as
the Perfect Manifestation of the Basis ’. It is said 15);
“ O Lord, one who has no doubt about the Matrix of the Tathāgata
as it is concealed under the millions of coverings of all defile-
ments, shall likewise have no doubt about the Absolute Body of
the Tathāgata which is 16) freed from the coverings of all defile-
ments ".
2) There are two kinds of knowledge. One is the Supermundane,
non-discriminative (Wisdom) ’ and the other, the Mundane 17) Wisdom
which is acquired afterwards [based on the former)'. This supermundane
and mundane Wisdom is the 6 cause of the Perfect Manifestation of the
Basis 18), and is indicated by the word ' attainment’ (prāpti). [Here] it
is called attainment’ in the sense that by which something is atta-
ined ' 19).
3) The result’ [obtained by] these [two kinds of Wisdom) is the
“ liberation' (visamyoga) 20). There are two kinds of liberation, viz. the
liberation from the obstructions of defilement; and the liberation from
the obstructions on account of the knowable things, respectively 21).
14) Cf. AAS 470 c: BoT W, (dhātu) * BET IR # F
to * , tale H, whereafter, the sūtra mentions 4
characteristics of 'āśrayaparivrti', namely 1) ** W (utpattiniśrayadānatvāt);
2)滅盡緣故(nirodhanistrayndinitrin); 3) 正熟思量所知法果故
(vipāka-mano-jñeyadharmaphalatvāt); 4) e (parisuddhadhar-
madhātu-svabhāvataḥ).
15) ŚMS 221 6.
16) The reading should be “ vinirmukte tathāgatadharmakāye “pi’, instead of
vinirmuktes tathā-'.
17) “ laukikam’ is to be insterted after prsthalabdham, acc. to T. and Ms. B.
18) For ‘āśrayaparivſtti”, C. At it. 11.
19) prāpyate' neneti prāptiḥ. (prāpti means here the means of attainment = prāp-
tyupāya, p. 80 l. 1) T. ḥdis thob-pas na thob-paḥo, C. #ilt 1, 1C (this sentence is to
be placed immediately after W'See below).
20) The reading, “ tatphalam dvividham / ’ is doubtful, although T. completely agrees
with S. For this, C. reads as “jñānâdhigamo eva (tat) phalam 1', and omits “ dvividham”.
What is signified by the term dvividham is quite uncertain. (Acc. to v. III, 2 & 3, it may
refer to “ visamyoga-phala' and ' vipāka-phala ', but the term vipāka is used nowhere
in Chap. II). From the context, therefore, it is preferable to read tatphalam visamyogaḥl’,
for dvividham/
yathākramam' beforesvaparârtha-' should be connected with the preceding
.
21) 6
[ 312 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhāga
4) The
'function is the accomplishment of one's own aim and
that of others.
5) [The point that] the foundation (adhisthāna) 22) of this function
is provided (samanvāgama) with’[the inmeasurable properties) is [here
called] 'union
6)-8) The “manifestation 23) means that [this Perfect Manifestation
of the Basis] manifests itself in the forms of three Bodies of the Buddha
which are characterized by profundity, magnificence, and magnanimity,
respectively (gāmbhirya, audārya, māhātmya), and (manifests] 'eternally,
as long as the world exists', and in an “inconceivable manner.
Summary.
The own nature, the cause, and the result,
The function, the union, and the manifestation,
Its eternal and inconceivable character;
By these points, there is the establishment [of the Essence]
In Buddhas' Stages 24). || 2 ||
sentence. (-visamyogaś ca yathākramam / sva-). So does C. (KHR
). (There is no correspondence between each of the two kinds of visamyoga and
of the two kinds of artha-sampādana).
Here C. has again confusion in its arrangement. 12 MES, **
should be placed after #le. The correct arrangement of these passages
in C. should be as follows:
....14 MWM # E TT ELE. HE IL , 1.
119 1.**PR,
ER TI = THE
- KTT HA B =*, HELST BE RERNE.
11 . * *, kn FI FU PL ist e tj,
They
22) T. rten[-pa], C. È ##(=āśraya in the verse). It signifies Buddhahood charac-
terized as muktikāya and dharmakāya (v. II, 30). For the whole sentence, C. reads:
· Hoe te , FI FI fill 1 FILE IJ for
* , . it is quite difficult to render this C. translation, but in
the light of v. 30, we may interpret it as follows: The union means that the immeasurable
qualities which are obtained by svaparârtha (-sampatti) are always and ultimately united
with the foundation (yoga iti svaparârthaprāptânumeyaguņānām nityam acintyam adhi-
șthāne yogah /).
23) C. mentions nitya, acintya along with vrtti. (T1, T,
TX).
24) buddhabhūmi (pl.).
[ 313 ]



XIII. 8 POINTS ON THE UNDEFILED REALITY
(I) SVABHĀVA & (II) HETU
Now, we have one śloka on Buddhahood and the means for its attain-
ment) referring to the subjects of own nature' and 'cause' respectively.
(Kārikā 1)
Buddhahood has been spoken of as being radiant by nature,
[however) as being covered with the net of the multitude of clouds,
In the form of [obstructions on account of] defilements
And knowable things which are of accidental nature,
Just as the sun and the sky 2) [are often interrupted by clouds
Though they are radiant and immaculate, respectively] 3);
This Buddhahood is now eternal, everlasting and constant,
Being endowed with all the the pure properties of the Buddha,
And is attained when the elements [of existence] take resort 4)
To the Non-discriminative and Analytical Wisdom 5). // 3 ||
The meaning of this śloka is to be known in brief by the [following]
4 verses.
Buddhahood, which is represented by 6)
The indivisible virtuous properties,
1) prāptyupāya. It stands for 'prāpti' (= hetu) in the preceding passage.
2) C. says instead the sun and the moon'.
3) CE. DAŚ 893 a (v. 10:
Wo Jaz FT KIT
BE HA.
4) dharmāņām... āśrayāt. But both T. & C. read this dharma as connecting with
avikalpa: T. chos-la mi-rtog, C. HE SÆ. Therefore, the reading • dharmā-
ņām' is somewhat doubtful. Or is it an irregular Skt. style peculiar to the Buddhist text?
5) akalpana & pravicaya-jñāna, T. mi-rtog & rnam-ḥbyed ye-śes. C. for this line,
TSU X 10 SHULE dharmeşv avikalpād, anāsrava-tattvajñānam
āpyate). Here the reference is, however, to the two kinds of jñāna, i.e. avikalpajñāna and
tatprsthalabdha-jñāna.
6) prabhāvita. C. has no equivalent word for it. T. rab-dbye-ba (prabhinna).
[ 314 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
Has a resemblance to the sun and the sky
In both its characters, knowledge and removal ?). || 4 //
It is endowed with all the properties of the Buddha,
Which are beyond the sands of the Gangā in number,
And are radiant and of uncreated nature 8),
And whose manifestations are indivisible (from itself] 9). // 5 //
Because of their being unreal by nature 10),
Because of their pervadingness and occasionality,
The obstructions 11) of defilements and of ignorance
Are illustrated as being like clouds. // 6 //
The cause of dissolving 12) these two obstructions is Wisdom,
Which is again considered as 13) of two kinds,
One is the Non-discriminative (Wisdom]
And the other is the knowledge, obtained afterwards 14). // 7 //
(III) PHALA
It is said that the ' own nature of the Perfect Manifestation of the
Basis is the perfect purity'. This purity is here, in short, of two kinds.
Namely, 1) the 'innate purity' (prakſtiviśuddhi); and 2) “ the purity,
as the result of purification’ (vaimalyaviếuddhi) 15). Of them, 1)the
»» C. takes ' dvaya ' as advaya' it ), and readset (jñāna) and
(prahāņa) are non-dual'. T. as prahāņa-dvaya, i.e. two kinds of prahāņa.
B) akrtaka, T. byas-min, c. # 1 X.
9) avinirbhāgavrtti (Bahuvrihi comp.), T. dbye-med-par hjug-can, C. TE TE
Tom. vrtti).
10) svabhāvâparinispatti, T. ran-bshin-gyis ni ma-grub, c. ' FIE .
11) avrti, T. sgrib-pa, C. B.
12) viśleşa, T. -dan bral-ba, c. € (= visamyoga).
13) For isyate', c. ln (to intend, to be intended).
14) For · tatprsthalabdha ', c. # # F 14. There is no correspondence between
each of the two obstructions and the two kinds of wisdom.
15) T. ran-bshin-gyis rnam-par dag-pa, & dri-ma med-paủi rnam-par dag-pa:
c. A & M , respectively. The former is characterized as
vimuktir na ca visamyogaḥ’, and the latter, ' vimuktir visamyogaś ca (C. P a
得解脫: In this sense, visamyoga is regarded as “phala '. Cf. MSA XII, 15:
svabhāva-buddham mala-śuddhitam ca ( P & THE JO , C. Taisho, XXXI, p. 620 b,
and in the commentary, C. distinguishes both purities by the terms &). Also
See AĀS 472 a: E FILE WE #I.
&
[ 315 ]



J. TAKASAKI
innate purity' represents that which is essentially free [from all stains]
but actually associated with them, [i.e. Reality mingled with pollutions).
Indeed, the Innate Mind, though being radiant, is not [always] separated
from the accidental pollutions. 2) “The purity, as the result of purifi-
cation represents [that which is) essentially free and actually, too,
liberated from [all pollutions) 16). Because, just as water and the like
become purified from dirt, impurities, etc., the radiant Innate Mind is
completely liberated from the accidental pollutions.
Now we have two ślokas about 'the Purity, as the result of purifica-
tion' with reference to the subject of ‘ result ’17).
(Kārikās 2-3)
Like a pond, filled with pure water,
Becomes abundant with flowering lotus gradually 18),
Like the full moon delivered from the jaws of Rāhu 19),
Like the sun, whose rays have been released
From the covering of clouds and others 20),
This [Buddhahood], being endowed with pure properties,
Manifests itself as being liberated 21). // 8 //
16) For visamyoga, C. reads in negative to — UJJÆ, sarvadharmâvisa-
myogaḥ).
17) Here again C. reads in negative T).
18) A simile for the immaculate nature liberated from 'rāga’, see v. 12. But the
point of similarity is not clear. Cf. Daś kp ith the ho (v. 17), kp the zk
terte , Ł. FIT TE TEH (893 c). Rather, lotus is usually said to
grow in dirty water.
For the second half of this line, C. 種種雜花樹周邊常圍達.
It suggests the word 'druma’ as in Ms. B. The last 5 letters are for ‘ādhya’, for which
T. rgyas.
19) A simile for the immaculate compassion liberated from ' dveșa ’, see v. 13. ‘rāhu'
(T. sgrag-can, C. HE ) is a personification of the phenomenon of eclipse and is counted
one of 'nava grahāḥ’, see Mvyut. 164. Cf. DAŚ v. 16: TF ko F i Bos 1L
TL FIT ht, and RH W WEB HE TE RE E L L XL (893 b,
comm. on v. 16); v. 18 (893 c) Hote.
20) A simile for the immaculate Wisdom, liberated from 'moha’, see v. 14. Ct.
DAŚ 893 c: Rp 8, L ME DJ & K JEL
mit st Thing TM (v. 91).
21) bhāti muktam tad eva, T. snar-Idan (bhāti-yuktam) de-ñid-do, c. U ELEP
(probably as S.).
[ 316 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
This Buddhahood 22) is [also] like the Highest of Sages 23)
Like honey, like the kernel (of corns], like gold,
Like a precious store of jewels, like a great fruit-tree,
Like an immaculate precious image of the Buddha,
Like the Highest Lord of the world,
And like a golden statue 24). // 9 //.
The meaning of these two ślokas, in short, is to be known by the
following 8 verses:
The result of the Non-discriminative Wisdom
In short, is said to be akin to a pond and others,
Being pure (as the result of the removal] of
Desire and other accidental defilements. || 10 ||
[On the other hand], the result of Wisdom,
Attained on the basis of the former, is explained
As the actual sight of the Buddha's state
Possessed of all kinds of excellency 25). || 11 ||
It is like a pond filled with shining water
Because of its rejecting the dirtiness 26) of the dust of Desire,
And because of its sprinkling 27) the water of meditation
On the disciples who are like lotus flowers. || 12 ||
It has a resemblance to the immaculate full moon 28),
Since it has been released from the Rāhu of Hatred
And since it pervades all the world
With the rays 29) of Great Love and Compassion. // 13 //
22)
jinatva, T. rgyal-ba-ñid, c. RH * .
23) munivrşa (= munirşabha). C. E' is probably a mistake, it should be
Tols (or E).
24) As all of these 9 examples are the same as those spoken in Chap. 1, this kārikā
cannot be understood by itself unless there is assumed the knowledge of the 9 examples
on tathāgatagarbha. Such is not a characteristic of the genuine kārikās in this text,
and hence the originality of this verse is quite doubtful. See my Introduction.
25) The significance expressed in these two verses is as follows: The visamyoga of
dhātu is immediately followed by the manifestation of buddhatva accompanied by buddha-
guņas, just as avikalpajñāna is immediately followed by tatprşthalabdha-jñāna.
26) kālusya, C. 30 K, T. om.
27) abhişyandana, T. ḥbab, c.m.
2) pürņavimalêndu C. + fi.
20) For amśu, C. 7K (ambu), but T. ḥod-zer.
( 317 )



J. TAKASAKI
And this Buddhahood is similar to the immaculate sun,
Because of its being free from the clouds of Ignorance,
And because of its removing the darkness of the world
With the rays of its divine Wisdom. // 14 ||
Being possessed of the unequalled 30) properties,
Bringing forth the essence of the Highest Doctrine 31),
And being free from the outer covering 32) [of Defilements],
It is like the Buddha 33), like honey and the kernel [of grains). // 15 ||
Being pure 34), being freed from the poverty
By the richness 35) of its properties,
And being the giver 36) of the fruit of Liberation,
It is like gold, like a treasure, and a tree, [respectively) 37). || 16 ||
By its body's being made of the jewel of the Doctrine 38),
Its being the Highest Lord of the human beings 39),
And its having the appearance of the most precious form 40)
It is like a precious [image], a king and a golden statue. || 17 ||
(IV) KARMAN 41)
It has been said that the two kinds of Wisdom, viz. the supermundane
Non-discriminative Wisdom and the mundane knowledge, obtained after-
wards on the basis of the former 42), are the cause of the Perfect Manifesta-
tion of the Basis, which is called the result of the liberation ’, and the
30) atulyatulya, T. mi-mñam mñam, c. TIE (= asamasama). This line stands
for adhigamadharma.
31) It stands for désanādharma.
32) phalgu, T. śun-pa (= tvak), C. * (Pāli. pheggu).
33) C. reads' sugata’ as the subject. But it is absolutely a mistake.
34) pavitra, T. dagſ-pa], C. #ry (?). C. again misreads this line.
36) dravya, T. rjas, C. ITF (?).
36) T. •smin-byed' for dāna is to be corrected into •sbyin-byed'. These three
stand for tathatā, prakſtisthagotra and samudānita-gotra, respectively.
37) C. om. nidhi (a varia lectio in Taisho edition gives us the reading:
BUJ PR. The correct reading is therefore lette ARP).
38) Indicating dharmakāya.
30) dvipada-agrādhipatya, T. rkan-gñis bdag-po mchog, c. H E B E E.
It indicates probably sambhoga-kāya.
40) Indicating nirmāņa-kāya.
41) Cf. AĀS 472 C. ... (5) IF FF ).
42) For these two jñānas, AAS THE BUDE & THE IT TO
[ 318 ]



The Ratna go tra vibhāga
function’ of the Wisdom is the fulfilment of one's own aim and of that
of others. Then, what is the “ fulfilment of one's own aim and of that of
others ’? That which represents the attainment of the undefiled Absolute
Body, as being freed from the obstructions due to Defilements and
knowable things along with their potential forces is called the fulfilment
of one's own aim'. And that which comes after the attainment of the ful-
filment of one's own aim, and represents the manifestation, by means of
twofold power 43), viz. 1) appearance in the forms of two bodies 44); and
2) the teaching by means of them, [both of] which continue as long as
the world exists, without any effort, it is called the “fulfilment of the
aim of others'.
About this fulfilment of one's own aim and of that of others, with re-
ference to the subject function', we have three ślokas.
6
(Kārikās 4-6)
Buddhahood 45), being the foundation 46)
Immaculate and all-pervading,
Of unperishable nature, and everlasting,
Quiescent, constant and unchangeable 47),
Is, like space, the cause 48) for the Intelligent 49)
To experience the objects through 6 sense-organs 50). // 18 /
It gives always the cause [for enjoyment]
In showing the miraculous apparitional forms,
In the pure audition of its perfect preaching,
43) vibhutva, T. dban-ḥbyor-ba, C.
t . Two-fold means deśană & darśana-
vibhutva'.
44) From the context, “kāyadvaya' here probably means the twofold rūpakāya.
(C. 二種佛身,AAS 二種身。 The same term is used in v. 28. The cor-
respondence between each of the twofold jñāna and of the twofold arthasampatti is not
clearly observed here. But AĀS regards svârthasampatti as caused by avikalpajñāna, and
parârthasampatti as caused by tatprsthalabdha-jñāna.
45) tathāgatatva, C. Po ko * f.
46) pada, T.
gnas, C.
::
*7) acyuta, T. hpho-ba, med-pa, c. Tik.
48) C. reads. E for kārana (with a negative, in the sense Buddhahood itself
is animitta).
10) sat, c. (dhimat). T. • dag-pal ſuddha)' is probably a corruption. This
satām' (gen. pl.) is commented on as dhirāņām' (v. 28).
50) şaļindriya-visaya, i.e. șadāyatanāni, namely: rūpa, sabda, gandha, rasa, spar-
sitavya and dharma, whose account is given in the next verse.
[ 319 ]



J. TAKASAKI
In the pure scent of the Buddhas' morality,
In tasting 51) of the taste of the great, sublime and highest Doc-
trine, // 19 //
In the enjoyment of the pleasurable touch of meditation,
And in the cognition of doctrine 52), profound by its nature;
(But], being the Highest Truth, the thicket 53) of quite subtle
thinking 54),
The Tathāgata himself, like space, is of no visible mark 55). // 20 //
The meaning of these three ślokas, in brief, is to be known by the fol-
lowing 8 verses.
The function of the twofold Wisdom
In short, is to be known as follows:
[One is the fulfilment of the Body of [innate] liberation,
[The other is] the purification of the Absolute Body 56). // 21 |
The Body of innate liberation and the Absolute Body,
[Although) being two [in their functions), are to be known as one,
52)
51) vindana, T. myan (enjoying), C. Hal (giving).
naya, T. tshul, C. (dharma).
53) gahvara, C. FU , for which T. bde-mdsad (samkaram). C. om. paramārtha.
64) · sūkşmacintā-paramârtha-gahvaram' for the whole line.
55) nimitta-varjitam, T. rgyu-mtshan rnams dan bral. C. ME!
is a misreading (reading tathāgato viyomanimitta-varjitaḥ). It should be
E
56) muktikāya, T. grol-baħi sku (hgro-ba in D. is probably a mistake), c. * ;
and dharmakāya, c. 1, respectively.
These two kāyas show the two aspects of the dharmakāya, the Absolute itself, in
regard to its function. Namely, the dharmakāya in its result aspect (III. phalârtha) is
characterized as ‘vimuktir visamyogaś ca’. Here the muktikāya seems to represent vimukti
(as the characteristic common to samalā tathatā and nirmalā tathatā), and the dharmakāya,
visamyoga (as the characteristic unique to bodhi). Consequently, these two also correspond
to the prakṣtistha-gotra and the samudānita-gotra, respectively. From the aspect of 'vi-
mukti ’, the function of the dharmakāya is characterized as the perfection of Enlighten-
ment, while from the aspect of ' visamyoga ', its function is characterized as the purifi-
cation of itself. As far as this characterization is concerned, these two functions represent
svârthasampatti. So does the AĀS say (472 c fH #FU, WWF ,
, the HB- UJ , FI). But if we apply
the character of the samudānitaġotra to the second function, it may be termed parârtha-
sampatti because the dharmakāya as samudānitagotra is the cause of the rūpakāya which
works for parârtha. See my Introduction.
[ 320 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
Because they are free from passions and all-pervading,
And are the immaculate substratum 57). // 22 //
It is free from passions'
Since the Defilements are resisted along with impressions;
Wisdom is considered as “pervading'
Since it has neither attachment nor hindrance. || 23 //
The “ absolute immutability’ is caused
By its nature of imperishability 58),
[Here] “imperishability' is a general statement 59),
Which is explained by the words, “everlasting', etc. // 24 //
The “ Evanescence ? 60) is to be known as of four kinds,
Being the counterparts of everlasting' and the rest,
[They are namely]: 'putridity', 'disease',
Annihilation and death in an inconceivable way’ 61). 1! 25 ||
Because of their absence, it is known to be
* Everlasting', 'quiescent ', 'constant' and 'unchangeable',
And this immaculate Wisdom is the substratum,
Since it is the support 62) of [all] the pure elements. || 26 ||
Just as space, being itself of no cause,
Is the cause of perceiving, hearing and so on
Of form, of sounds, of tastes, of smells,
Of things touchable and of substances respectively, // 27 //
In the same way, the twofold [apparitional] Body 63)
On account of its connection with 64) the undefiled character,
6
57) anāsravatva (C.
FILE )
vyāpitva (c. ii)
and asamskȚtapadatva (c. #
THE E. CF. AĀS, FUT TJ PO 5 (svârtha is avinirbhāga from
3 guņas; namely): — * THE = this EMEA.
68) avināsitva, T. hjig-pa med-pa, C. TX.
59) uddeśa, C. FR (fundamental statement).
60) nāśa, c. €.
61) pūti, T. myags, C. JE ; vikſti, T. rnam-hgyur, C. SHE ; ucсhitti, T. chad-pa,
c. $; and acintya-namana-cyuta, T. bsam mi-khyab-par hpho-ba, C. The
ik, respectively.
62) aspada, T. rten, C. 19.
63) For kāyadvaya, C. X I. Does it mean muktikāya and dharmakāya ? But see
Note 44. It may be more natural to regard it as the twofold rūpakāya. C. interpretation
is, however, not untenable, since the Kārikā refers only to Buddhatva and the rūpakāya
is nothing but a term for buddhatva or dharmakāya when it works for parârtha.
64) yogataḥ, T sbyor-bas (by means of). C. has no equivalent word. C. shortens
this verse omitting many words.
3
[ 321 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Is the cause for wise men 65) to give rise to
Immaculate virtues in the objects of sense-organs. // 28 /!
(V) YOGA 66)
68)
It is said that the Buddha has the character of space 67). This refers
specially to the absolute and exclusive character of the Buddha. So it
is said 69).
“ If the Tathāgata could be recognized merely by the 32 marks
of a superman, the universal monarch, too, would turn to be a
Buddha”.
Now, there is one śloka about the highest character 70) in reference to
the subject of union
(Kārikā 7)
Being inconceivable, eternal and ever-lasting,
Being quiescent, constant, and perfectly pacified,
Being all-pervading and apart from discrimination,
The pure and immaculate Buddhahood is like space,
It has neither attachment nor hindrance anywhere,
And, being devoid of rough 71) sensation,
It can be neither perceived nor cognized. // 29 /
Now, the meaning of this śloka is, in short, to be known by the fol-
lowing 8 verses.
The [fulfilment of] one's own aim and of that of others
Are represented by the Bodies of Liberation and of the Absolute 72);
(6) # .
65) dhira (= dhimat,) T. bstan-pa (śāsts).
66) Cf. AĀS 472 c
67) See above (v. 20): tathāgata-vyoma. e.g. JĀA 243 c. Also see Chap. III (on
the 18 Exclusive Properties).
68) abhisamdhāya, T. dgons-pas,
c. HE (?).
69) The Vajracchedikāsūtra, Skt. p. 42-43; C. Taisho, XII, p. 752 a.
70) paramārthalakṣaṇa, T. don dam-paḥi mtshan-ħid, c. - **.
paruşa, T. rtsub, C. () .
72) See note XIII-55.
ܝܘ
71)
[ 322 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
On this foundation 73) of one's own aim and of that of others
There is the “union' of properties, 'inconceivable' and
// 301
Buddhahood is accessible only to the Wisdom of the Omniscient,
And is not the object of the 3 [kinds of ordinary] knowledge 74),
Therefore, it is to be known as 'inconceivable
[Even] for those people of intellect 75). // 31 ||
Being of subtle character, it is not the object of study,
Being the Highest Truth, it is not the object of thought,
And, being the impenetrable Absolute Essence 76),
It is not accessible to the mundane meditation and the like, || 32 ||
Because it has never been seen before by ordinary persons,
Like the visible forms 77) for those who are born blind, nor even by
the Saints 78),
Like the disk of the sun for infants lying in their mother's bed 79).
// 33!
It is 'eternal', as it is devoid of birth ;
It is everlasting', since it does not disappear;
It is 'quiescent', because it is free from dualism,
And is constant' because of endurance of Reality 80). // 34 ||
It is 'perfectly pacified' as being the Truth of Extinction,
It is 'all-pervading' since it cognizes everything ;
It is non-discriminative' as it has no insistence 81);
And “has no attachment ’ since it rejects defilements. // 35 |
Being purified from all the obstructions of Ignorance,
It “has no hindrance' in regard to everything [knowable);
G
73) āśraya, C. HE (depending upon svaparârtha).
74) trijñāna, i.e. śruti-cintā-bhāvanāmaya-jñāna.
75) jñānadehin,
dhimat), T. ye-ses-lus-can,
C. om.
76) dharmatā=gahvaratvataḥ, T. chos-ñid zab phyir, C.
DE (lokottara-
gahvarataḥ). For gahvara, T. zab, c. t .
77) So T. gzugs, and C. Ú. Probably the reading is “rūpa' instead of “kāya’
(or kāya in the sense of rūpakāya; collective of forms).
78) C. regards this ārya’ as those Saints who belong to śrāvaka- & Pratyekabud-
dha-yāna.
79) sūtikā-sadma-sthita, acc. to T. btsas-paủi khyim-(g)nas. The reading is there-
fore to be “ sadma' instead of madhya ’. C. om. all these words. Cf. ŚMS 222 a:
ko t
日嬰兒不見日輪,
80) As for these 4 epithets, see VIII-IX C). (vv. I, 80–82).
81) apratişthāna, T. gnas-pa med[-pa], C. T .
[ 323 ]
22



J. TAKASAKI
2
Being of soft and light-moving nature 82)
It is “devoid of rough sensation ’. // 36 //
Being immaterial, it cannot be perceived,
And being of no [visible) mark 83), it is 'incognizable ’;
It is pure' since it is pure by nature,
And is “immaculate ' because of its removal of pollutions 84). || 37 ||
(VI) VŔTTI 85)
Now again it should be known that this Buddhahood, due to its posses-
sion of properties uncommon to others, manifests itself, though by means of
a manifestation which is inseparable from its immutable qualities like space,
still in the forms of three 86) immaculate bodies, viz. “the Body of Abso-
lute Essence (svābhāvika)', 'the Body of Enjoyment (sambhogya)', and
“the Apparitional Body (nairmāņika) 87), with various inconceivable appli-
ances 88) like the Great skilful means, Great Compassion, and Wisdom, in
order to be the support 89) of the welfare and happiness of all living beings,
as long as the world exists, without cessation, without interruption, and
with no effort.
So, with reference to this subject of 'manifestation', there are 4 ślokas
about the distinction of [three kinds of] Buddha's Body.
82) mydu-karmanya-bhāvataḥ, c. ** (as S.). But for this line, T. gñis-med las-
su run-baủi phyir (advaya-karmaņi bhāvataḥ).
83) animitta, T. mishan-ma med, c. .
84) AĀS makes 19 dharmas possessed by bodhi out of this passage. Namely: 1) 7
可思量(acinaya); 2) 微細(siksman; 3) 真實 (paramarhan); 4) 道理甚深
(gambhirya-naya, - dharmati-gahvara?); 5) TATL (adſbya); 6) Wit (dus-
prativedha); 7) (nitya); 8) TE (dhruva ?); 9) (prašānta); 10) KU (śāśvata);
11) (siva); 12) Mai (vyāpi); 13) HE I) (avikalpa); 14) FIE (asanga
or asakta); 15) FIE TIERE (apratigha); 16) (anusāra ?); 17) T o L (agrāhya);
18) * (subha); 19) E (amala). Of them, 6) and 16) have no equivalent in
the Ratna.
85) Cf. AĀS 473 a, BGŚ 809 a-811 a (under Avikāra).
86) “... amalai stribhiḥ' should be corrected into '... amalais tribhiḥ'. (In Deva-
nāgri script, they should be written without separation).
87) For these three, c. T , * & 1 o..
88) parikarman, T. yonis-su sbyon-ba, c. *. Against J’s note, T. (D) has sñin-rje
between thabs chen-po and ses-rab.
80) ādāna-nimitta, T. sgrub-paủi rgyu, c. ....
[ 324 ]



The Rat nag otra vibhāga
(Kārikās 8–11)
That which has neither beginning, middle nor end,
Is indivisible 90), non-dual, liberated in three ways 91),
Immaculate and non-discriminative,
That represents the nature of the Absolute Essence 92)
And is perceived by the Saints 93),
Who are concentrating their mind, striving after it 94); // 38 //
This [Absolute Essence] is nothing but the pure Essence 95) of the
Tathāgatas,
Which is endowed with properties, inconceivable, unequalled,
Innumerable, and surpassing the sands of the Gangā in number
And has rooted out 96) all the defects along with impressions. // 39 //
One who exerts in concentrating for 97) the liberation of the world,
With the body 98) in the form of different coloured rays of the Highest
Doctrine,
Has a resemblance, in his acts, to the king of wish-fulfilling gems,
Appearing in various forms, which, however, have not their own sub-
stance 99). !| 40 //
That which is the cause 100), in various worlds,
90) For abhinna, C. T DJ tr.
91) tridhā vimuktam. T. as S. And this reading is supported by the commentary
verse (v. 45: kleśa-jñeya-samāpatti-trayāvaraṇa-niņsritam). But C.
PIETAT
(tridhātu-muktam), and I guess this was the original reading.
02) For “yam dharmadhātu-svabhāvam ?, C. IL WEB and adds
FE Hr Ell (unknown to Śrāvaka- and Pratyekabuddha-yānikas).
»3) yogin, T. rnal-ħbyor-pa, c. # of kn(connecting
with samāhita).
94) For ' tat-prayatnāḥ’, T. de rtogs-pa (tad-adhigacchanti) (connecting tad with
yam dharmadhātusvabhāvam '). But S. seems better. C. has no equivalent word.
95) dhātu, T. dbyins, C. . For • tathāgatānām amalaḥ.
For · tathāgatānām amalaḥ ... dhātuħ”, c. ko *
treby Ú Ý the Ho insertion of thely 9' (rūpakāya) suggests that
C. regards this verse as referring to sambhogakāya).
96) unmūlita, T. rnam-spańs-pa, C
E.
97) For samähyta-udyamaḥ, T. grub-la brtson-pa (siddhyudyamah), c. SHE
T.
98) vigraha, T. sku, C. .
99) All bhāvas are of niņsvabhāva, but are inseparable from the Absolute. See the
next verse.
100) nidāna, T. rgyu, C. om.
[ 325 ]



J. TAKASAKI
For advancing into the Quiescent Path 101),
For bringing to full development and for giving prophecy,
That is the Apparitional Form [of the Buddha) 102),
Which also abides 103) always in the Absolute Essence 104)
As the visible forms in the element of space. || 41 ||
The summarized meaning of these 4 ślokas are to be known by the foll-
owing 20 verses:
That which is called Buddhahood
Is the Omniscience of the Self-born,
The highest Nirvāņa 105), and the inconceivable Arhatship 106),
Which is realized through self-introspection. || 42 ||
This [Buddhahood] manifests itself in the variety
Of three Bodies, the Body of the Absolute Essence, etc.,
Represented by the quality of Profundity,
Of Magnificence, and of Magnanimity, [respectively). || 43 |/
a) The Body of the Absolute Essence (svābhāvika-kāya) 107).
Here, the Body of the Absolute Essence
Of the Buddha, in short, is to be known
As of five characteristics,
And being possessed of five kinds of properties. // 44 //
It is “immutable' and 'indivisible ?,
Is “devoid of the two extremities ’,
And is delivered from the 3 Obstructions'
Of defilement, ignorance and distraction 108). // 45 //
104)
101) śāntipatha (c.
means nirvāṇa.
102) bimba, T. gzugz, c. * f . (= nirmāņakāya).
103) avaruddha (enclosed in), T. gnas (avasthita, abiding in). But C. T E.
atra, in the sense 'in dharmadhātu-svabhāva’ (v. 38). C. IT WIE *.
105) nirvștiḥ paramā, T. mchog-tu mya-nan-ḥdas. C. takes paramā separately and
regards it as indicating · paramârtha’.
106) For acintyaprāpti, both T. & C. read as acintyârhattva (T. bsam-med dgra-
bcom, c. 7 P.), which is to be accepted here. Consequently,
' pratyātmaveditā' is to be corrected into “pratyātmaveditam’.
107) Commentary on vv. 39, 40.
108) This is the first appearance of the 'trayâvaraņa' theory in the text. The third
āvaraņa, i.e. samāpatty-āvarana means the obstructions on account of samādhi, which
is peculiar to the Bodhisattva.
[ 326 ]



The Ratnago tra vibhāga
Being free from all stains and thought-construction,
And being accessible to the Saints,
It is “radiant and pure'
Owing to the nature of the Absolute Essence 109). || 46 ||
Immeasurable', 'innumerable', 'inconceivable', 'incomparable
And representing the highest point of purity ';
The Body of the Absolute Essence is endowed
With 110) these [5] kinds of virtuous qualities 111). || 47 ||
Being magnificent 112) and numberless,
109) These are the 5 lakṣaņas, namely: 1) asamskrta; 2) asambhinna; 3) antadvaya-
vivarjita; 4) trayâvaraņa-niḥssta; & 5) prabhāsvaram visuddham ca. For them, AĀS:
1) TIE TA; 2) Ti to pyt; 3) pet = id; 4) - JJ B; 5) PE
(473 a); and BGS: 1) FILE WI; 2) JE — * * (THE 50 W); 3) at itu;
4) B; 5) + (809 a-810 b, with a detailed explanation).
The last one is not clear. T.
regards
prabhāsvaram as the fifth laksaņa and
reads " viśuddha 'in the ablative, and thus makes 5 reasons for these 5 lakṣaṇas, but the
concordance between each laksaņa and its reason is uncertain. C. reads as S., except for
the omission of avikalpatvād’ (the second pada,
, should be 聖人
). BGś clearly mentions the 5 reasons in accordance with the 5 lakṣaṇas:
1) asamskſtam, dharmadhātusvabhāvataḥ (PHC); 2) abhinnam, avikalpatvāt (File 5
$) C); 3) antadvayavivarjitam, yoginām gocaratvataḥ (O); 4) ăvara-
manińsſtam, prabhāsvaratayā (PEC); 5) visuddham, vaimalyād #
#). (The last two reasons should be interchanged).
There seems to be confusion of the word arrangement in v. 46, but as it is difficult
to establish which is the original reading, the present translation is done according to
the Skt. text. For the reference, however, I will suggest below the most reasonable
rendering of this verse:
And (5) it is pure' (viếuddha);
Because it is the nature of the Absolute Essence (1),
Because it is non-discriminative (2),
Because it is the acting sphere of the Saints (3),
Because it is free from stains (vimala), (4),
And because it is radiant by nature (prabhāsvara), (5) respectively.
110) T. adds ‘yan-dag-par' (samyak) before yukta ’.
111) 1) aprameya; 2) asamkhya; 3) acintya; 4) asama; & 5) viếuddhipāramiprātpi,
respectively. For these 5 guņas, AĀS, TO , TOW, WE, TW, &
; BGś, Tin , T , TOD, THE HIL,&
(810 6-c).
112) udāra, T. rgya-che, C. ff.
[ 327 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Being inaccessible to investigation,
Being unique 113) and devoid of the defiling forces,
It is ‘immeasurable’ and so on, respectively 114). // 48 //
b) The Body of Enjoyment (sāņbhögika-kāya) 115).
It manifests itself the Doctrine, owing to its nature 116)
Of enjoying the Doctrine in various forms;
Being the natural outflow 117) of pure Compassion,
It works uninterruptedly for the sake of living beings; || 49 ||
It fulfils the aim according to the wish
Without thought-construction and with no effort;
[By these points] the Body of Enjoyment is characterized 118)
Due to its power like that of the wish-fulfilling gems. // 50 //
In teaching, in the visible form, in acting ceaselessly,
And acting with no artificial effort 119),
And in its appearance of illusion 120)
The variety 121) of [its manifestation] is said to be 5-fold. // 51 )
Just as a gem, being dyed with various colours,
Does not make manifest its real essence 122);
1
me (**
116)
118) C. om. kaivalya for which T. has ḥbaḥ-shig. It means 'being apart from all’.
116) C. adds To Be after kramāt ), whose meaning is not clear to
sambhoga ?).
115) Commentary on v. 40.
rūpa, T. ran-bshin (in the sense of ' svarūpa'?). C. for this line, 受種種
#*, T Hely (vicitradharmarasasambhoga-rūpâvabhāsataḥ).
111) For nişyanda, c. 1 i.
118) vyavasthiti, T. rnam-par gnas,
C.
PE 1 AN (thus is sāmbhogya-kāya).
AĀS makes 5 guņas, possessed by sāņbhoga-kāya, out of these two verses, namely:
1) THE 51); 2) SIE IH (anābhoga); 3) teĚ VE FI FR (sat-
tvārthakriyā); 4) HILT (dharmakāyâvinirbhāga); and 5) -
The X (nitya-vyāpi & sattvânupeksā)
119) anabhisamskſti, T. mnon-par ḥdu-byed med-pa, C. H . BR
(for which
the equivalent in S. in uncertain). deśana (teaching) in neuter stem is notable.
120) atatsvabhāvākhyāna, T. de yi no-bo mi-stori(-pa), C. T EL T T . For
these 5 appearances, BGŚ, & AĀS offer no reference.
121) citratā T. sna-tshogs. C. # ſvibhutva ?).
122) atatbhāva, C. (*###! — UJJT Tf. T. adds bhāsa(snan)
in order to make the meaning clear.
[ 328 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhāga
Similarly, the Lord 123) never shows its real nature,
Though it appears in various forms, according to the conditions of
the living beings. || 52 ||
c) The Apparitional Body (nairmāņika-kāya 124)).
[ The Buddha), being the knower of the world 125),
Perceiving fully the world, with Great Compassion,
Manifests himself 126) in various apparitional forms,
Without being separated from his Absolute Body. // 53 /
The [various previous births 127),
The birth in the Tuşita-heaven 128), and descent from it 129),
The entrance into the womb 130), and the birth [in this world] 131),
The skilfulness in various arts and works 132), || 54 ||
Pleasurable entertainments among ladies in the harem 133),
123) vibhu, T. khyab-bdag, C. kp 3k.
124) Commentary on v. 41.
125) lokavid (an epithet of the Buddha), T. hjig-rten-mkhyen. The whole verse is
missi ng in C. O regards this verse as explaining sambhogakāya.
126) The word “darśayati ’ is suplied from v. 56. The following (vv. 54-56) are the
list of Buddha's · mahāvastu' in the world, whose number is counted 14 according to
BGś + 29 $). Hereafter, these 14 will be mentioned in the Note one by one along
with their equivalent in BGŚ (810 c) and AĀS (473 a).
127) jātakāni (1), BGś ##; AĀS ## Ź *; T. skye-ba, but connecting
with next one and reading “jātakâbhyupapattim (skye-ba mnon-par skye-ba dan).
jātakāny-upapattim ca’ is missing in C.
128) upapattim ca tuşiteşu (2), BGś & FA EX, AĀS # # #.
T. connects ' tuşita’ with next one.
120) cyutim tataḥ (= tușitāt) (3), BGS BHA BE (abiding midway between
Tuşita and this world), AĀS PÉ REFT; T. dgah-Idan-nas ni hpho-ba, C. VE TE
BE B.
garbhâvakramaņa (4), T. lhums-su þjug, C.
C. 第入胎;BGS 入胎,
AAS 降神母胎,
131) janman (5), T. bstams-pa, c. &; BGś & Ba, AÃS RU ENG.
132) silpasthānāni kau salam (6), T. gzo-yi gnas-la mkhas-pa, c. 1*
BGS #RE, AĀS Z tit (18 vidyās). AĀS inserts one more
before (6): 俱摩羅位(humarushina) C. (
嬰兒) and BGS 童子
support this reading. For silpasthāna the Pāli equivalent is sippatthāna (PTS Dic.
8. v.), of which the number is often mentioned as 8, 12, or 18.
133) antahpuraratikriļā (7), T. btsun-moủi ḥkhor-gyis dkyes-rol, c. 21
I ; BGś T F SÉ, AS HA T 13.
130)
seem to
[ 32 ]



J. TAKASAKI
The renouncement of the world 134), practice of asceticism 135)
Passage to the Excellent Seat of Enlightenment 136),
The
conquest over the army of Evil Demons 137), // 55 ||
The [acquisition of] Enlightenment 138)
Setting into motion the wheel of the Doctrine 139)
And the departure into Nirvāņa 140); ... all of them
He shows in the impure worlds 141), as long as they exist. // 56 //
[The Buddha], the knower of means 142), creates an aversion
To the Three Worlds among the living beings
By the words, evanescent', suffering', 'non-substantial ';
And by the word quiescent’, he leads 143) them into Nirvāņa.
// 57 ||
Those who have entered the way to Quiescence 144)
And who imagine that they have attained Nirvāṇa 145)
134)
..
naişkramya (8), T. nes—hbyun, C. 厭離諸欲相出家; BES & AAS,
. c. # * # devoid of desires) for naiskramya shows that this
term came out of Pāli nekkhamma, which is, in its turn, combined in meaning with nikkāma
(S. nişkāma). In Pāli, ‘renunciation or to become a monk’ is often explained as
reject the worldly desire, lust, etc. '.
135) duḥkhacārikā (9), T. dkah-ba spyod-pa, C. TT TT: BGS & AĀS, 11.
136) bodhimandópasamkrānti (10), T. byan-chub-sñin-por gśegs-pa, c. Es
道場;BGS 菩提樹,AAS 於道場, C. adds推問諸外道
(asking for the way to various tīrthikas) before this. For bodhimaņda, T. byan-chub-
sñin-po, C. ji te. This does not mean the actual obtaining of Enlightenment.
137) mārasainyapramadana (11), T. bdud sde hjoms, c. B* # BEST; BGS
Tibb E T. AĀS om.
138) sambodhi (12), T. rdsogs-par ni byan-chub (T. seems to have combined this with
the next one), C. 成大妙覺;BGS 成佛,AAS 成佛道,
139) dharmacakra (13), T. chos-kyi ḥkhor-lo, C. SHE EXA; BGś
BM, AĀS Š
(setting dharmacakra forth at Varanasi).
140) nirvāṇâdhigamakriyā (14), T. mya-ran-ḥdas-par gśegs-mdsad, c. 1 THE EA
; BGS #EE AAS HE 4 13 * ', = Sā-
lavana, indicates Kuşinagara).
141) kşetra, T. shin, c. w. For kşetra aparisuddha, AĀS I.
142) upāyavid, (used as an epithet of the Buddha), c. ti .
143) pratārayati, T. rab-hjug, C. 1.
14) sāntimärga, T. shi-baħi lam, c.
145) “prāpta-nirvāņa-samjñinaḥ' would be better, since T. & C. agree with it. (T.mya-
.
[ 330 ]



The Ratna g otra vibhāga
Them he diverts 146) from their former prejudice,
Through the teaching of the True Doctrines 147)
In the Saddharmapundarika and other Sūtras,
And, embracing Wisdom and Skilful Means,
Makes them mature in the Ultimate Vehicle 148),
And gives prophecy for them to attain the Highest Enlighten-
ment. // 58–59 //
Being subtle, acc
ccomplishing the power
And toiling excessively 150) for the company 151) of ordinary beings, –
In these points (the Buddha) should be known, respectively,
As the Profound, the Magnificent and the Magnanimous. // 60 ||
Here, the first Body is the Absolute Body,
And the latter two are the Bodies in visible forms 152)
These latter 153) appear on the basis of the former,
As the visible forms appear in space. // 61 ||
149)
(VII) NITYA 154)
Now this threefold Body made manifest in order to be the support
for the weal and happiness of the world, has an eternal' character
ſin its manifestation) With reference to this subject, we have one
śloka.
nan-ḥdas-thob ħdu-ses-can, C. H 14.
2. C. adds #1
Et
146) nivariya, T. bzlog ste, C. 5. For grāha C. L.
147) dharmatattva, T. chos-kyi de-ñid, c. kp T.
148) Denoting the Mahāyāna. uttamayāna, T. theg-pa mchog, C. E.
149) prabhāva, T. mthu, C.
XI. T. sna-tshogs for sampatti is probably a
misreading for phun-tshogs.
150) ativāhana, T. rab-hdren, c. jo lien ji (surpassing the treacherous path).
151) sārtha, T. don-mthun, C. X (sattva). sārtha means a caravan or traders.
Therefore, analogically C. interpretation of ativāhana seems better.
162) rūpakāya, T. gzugs-kyi sku, c. ÚT . C. reads (the second)
for paciśmau.
antya. lit. the last. (C. & T. as S.). From the context, it should be the latter
152)
two.
154) Cf. AĀS 473 a (THEE ), BGś 811 a-b.
[ 331 ]



J. TAKASAKI
(Kārikā 12)
Having infinite causes (for the attainment of his state] 155),
Having an endless number of living beings to convert,
Being endowed with Compassion, Miraculous Powers 156), Wisdom
and Bliss 157)
Governing all the elements, vanquishing the demon of Death,
And representing non-substantiality 158),
The lord of the World 159) is eternal. || 62 ||
The summarized meaning of this [śloka] is to be known by the follow-
ing 6 verses.
Casting off his body, life and property,
He has preserved 160) the Highest doctrine;
For the benefits of all living beings,
He fulfills 161) his first vow 162). || 63 ||
In his Buddhahood, there is made manifest
Compassion, pure and immaculate 163),
He shows his [four] bases of Miraculous Powers 164)
By which power he abides in the world 165); // 64 ||
160)
156) hetv-ānantyāt, C. EI TEE THE .
156) ;ddhi, T. hphrul, c. k .
157) sampatti, T. phun-tshogs, C. ht . Acc. to the comm., sampatti stands for
sukha-sampatti through meditation'.
168) naiḥsvābhāvya, c. 1 (svabhāva-praśānta ?), which is explained in the
comm. as being asamskſta and ādipraśānta.
159) lokanātha, T. hjig-rten-mgon-po, c. th
samgraha, T. hdsin, C. Hr. This saddharma-samgraha is the 1st cause
standing for hetv-ānantyāt in the Kārikā.
161) uttarana, T. mthar-hbyin, c. * .
162) ādipratijñā, T. dan-poủi dam-bcas, c. * (pūrvapraạidhi). Cf. BGS:
初發心時結四弘誓願起十無盡大願:“若聚不盡,
Hi ha of the # # # F Th...”.
This stands for (2) sattvadhātv-akşayatvāt.
163) For (3) kārņya(-yogāt).
164) ;ddhi-pāda, T. rdsu-hphrul rkan-ba, C. PL] Rp 8. There are said to be 4,
namely: 1) chanda; 2) citta; 3) virya; & 4) mīmāmsā. Cf. Mvyut. 40.
165) So C. DI TEPI HH). S. tair avasthita śaktitaḥ, T. de-yis gnas-par spyod-
paủi phyir. For śakti, T. reads as if caryā. This is (4) rddhi-(yogāt).
[ 332 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
Owing to his Wisdom, he is liberated from
The dualistic conception of Samsāra and Nirvāņa 166);
By his constant practice of the inconceivable 167) meditation,
He partakes of the complement of bliss 168), // 65 //
While he is acting in the world,
He is unaffected by the worldly elements 169);
Having attained the state of quiescence and immortality,
He leaves no room for [the activity of] the demon of Death 170);
// 66 //
Being of an immutable nature,
The Lord is perfectly pacified from the outset 171);
And he gives a refuge for those who have no shelter 172),
Because of these [10] points, he is "eternal'. // 67 //
The first 7 of these motives show
The eternity of the Preceptor 173) in his Apparitional Body,
The latter 3 demonstrate the eternity
From the viewpoint of the Absolute Body. || 68 ||
166) For (5) jñāna(-yogāt).
167) For acintya, C. reads citta-', but T. bsam-yas.
168) This is for (6) sampatti-yogāt. About sukhasampatti, BGś: E, BP
是金剛心除無明住地最後念無常苦,以無苦故,
# ŽE
169) lokadharma, C. H . See Note V-47. This is for (7) dharmaišvaryāt.
170) For (8) mộtyumārāvabhangāt.
171) For (9) naiḥsvabhāvāt.
172) This is counted as the 10th cause, but has no correspondent term in the Kārikā.
It seems the commentator made this meaning of saraṇa, as the 10th cause, out of
lokanātha. But BGś, though likewise counting 10 causes, omits this last one and
samādhi' independently out of sukhasampatti. The 10 causes acc. to BGŚ are
as follows:
1) * THE (hetvānantya); 2) # E (sattvadhātvakşaya);
3) * # FE (karuņânantya); 4) o fue in (rddhyānantya), 5) THE 1
THE (avikalpajñānânantya); 6) 'T GETË E (sadā samādhānânumeya);
7) 安樂清凉(sukha & Str); 8)行於世間而不染入法 (dobe pricarato
aştadharmair anupalepah); 9)
UN JE BRE (amſta-sama-prāpti &
mětyumārāvabhanga); & 10) * # # FE FE in (being as it is by nature,
it is anutpādânirodha).
173) For śāsty, c. * if (sugata).
6
counts
[ 333 ]



J. TAKASAKI
(VIII) ACINTYA 174)
Now, this method of the attainment [of Buddhahood] by the Buddhas,
which represents the “ Perfect Manifestation of the Basis is to be under-
stood as of inconceivable character. With reference to this “inconceivabi-
lity', we have one śloka.
(Kārikā 13)
Being unutterable, containing the Highest Truth,
Inaccessible to investigation and incomparable,
Being the supreme, and relating neither
To the Phenomenal World nor to Nirvāņa 175),
The sphere of Buddha is inconceivable even for the Saints. || 69 ||
The summarized meaning of this [śloka] is to be understood by the
following 4 verses.
It is “inconceivable’ since it is unutterable;
It is unutterable’ since it is the Highest Truth;
It is the Highest Truth ’, since it cannot be constructed by thought,
It is beyond investigation as it is incomparable 176); // 70 //
It is incomparable since it is the supreme;
It is “the supreme since it is not included
[Either in the Phenomenal World or in Nirvāṇa);
Not included' means the Buddha abides in neither of the two
And never regards [in a one-sided manner]
That Nirvāṇa is of merit and the other is of defect. // 71 //
Being subtle by the [first] 5 motives 177)
He is inconceivable in his Absolute Body,
And by the 6th, on account of his Apparitional Body,
He is inconceivable because of no identification 178)
174) Cf. BGS 810 c f., AĀS 473 b.
175) bhava-śānty-anudgraha, T. srid-shis ma bsdus, C. T x jThis
idea of " not relating to both’ is the expression of “ apratisthita-nirvāņa”. BGS !
# JE
2. AAS mentions these 6 as the causes of inconceivability.
176) vyupameya (acc. to C. THE LII). Though T. & S. agree in their reading
vyanumeya', the word ' vyupameya ’ is more suitable here, since it is supported by the
reading in the Kārikā: upamā-nivſttitaḥ.
177) From "unutterable' to 'the supremacy', and the 6th is ' anudgraha ’.
178) atattvabhāvitva, T. de-yi dños-min [phyir] (= tadbhāvābhāvāt). Cf. v. 40: vici-
[ 334 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhāg a
With either Nirvāṇa or Phenomenal World. // 72 //
Being endowed with the Highest Wisdom,
With the Great Compassion and other virtues,
The Buddha, who has attained the ultimate point of virtue,
Is inaccessible to human thought;
Therefore, this final stage of the Buddha
Is unknown even to the Great Sages 179)
Who have attained the stage of Initiation 180), || 73 ||
Finished is the second chapter entitled 'the Enlightenment' in the
ANALYSIS OF THE GERM OF THE JEWELS, a Treatise on the
Ultimate Doctrine of the Great Vehicle.
trabhāvo na ca tatsvabhāvān. But C. reads Up (because of his obtaining
aiśvarya).
179) maharși. Here 'maharşi’, contrary to the common usage of this term for the
Buddha, denotes the Bodhisattva of the highest rank.
180) abhişeka, T. dban. This abhişekatā or abhişekaprāpta was regarded in the old
bhūmi-theory as the 10th and the highest stage of Bodhisattva, next to that of the Buddha,
as in the case of the Mahāvastu, &c. On this point, this verse (v. 73) seems to be an old
verse and is probably a quotation. The different usage of the term “rși’ in this verse is
also suggestive. C. om. this verse.
[ 335 ]



CHAPTER III.
THE PROPERTIES OF THE BUDDHA
3. BUDDHA-GUNA 1)
XIV. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE BUDDHA'S
PROPERTIES
We have finished the explanation of the Reality free from Pollu-
tions'. Hereafter, we shall speak of the Properties which are based
upon the Reality and are perfectly pure, being indivisible from Reality
by nature as the brightness, colour and shape of the jewel are inse-
parable from the latter. Therefore 3), immediately after [the exposition
of the Reality], we have one śloka referring to the distinct characteri-
stics 4) of the Buddha's Properties.
2)
(Kārikā 1)
The aim of one's own and that of others,
[Consists in] the Body of the Highest Truth 5)
And the Worldly Emanations 6) based upon it;
1) Cf. AĀS Chap. IV (Tathāgataguņa-parivarta), pp. 473 c-475 c, in which are
mentioned 180 äveņikadharmas including 32 mahāpuruṣalakṣanas, 80 anuvyañjanas, & 68
dharmas. Among this last group, 10 balas, 4 vaiśāradyas, and 18 aveņikadharmas are
counted besides 36 other dharmas.
2) abhinna-prakſtayaḥ (Bahu. comp. m. pl. N). For this, T. reads as an instru-
mental case. dbyer-med-paủi ran-bshin-ñid-kyis.
3) T. adds ' atas tad', before 'anantaram ņ'. C. also adds • ataḥ" (DLC).
But, as we have the same construction in the beginning of Chap. IV, it is not necessary
to change the Skt. text.
guņa-vibhāga. The term 'vibhāga' corresponds to 'prabheda’ in K 1.
5) From the point of meaning, the reading “paramarthakāyatā' of Ms. B. is preferable,
though one syllable is in excess by adding-tā'. It is sometimes allowable in such an
old-style Kārikā to keep an irregular metre. But T. stands for the present Skt. text.
) samvrtikāyatā, T. kun-rdsob-sku-ñid, c. H .
4)
[ 336 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
Representing the state of Liberation and Maturation,
The result is endowed with Properties,
Which
appear
in 64 varieties. || 1 ||
What is told by this śloka ?
The Body which represents the Highest Truth
Is the support for the completion of one's own [aim]
And the support for the fulfilment of others' [aim] 8)
Is the Emanational Body 9) of the Buddha 10). // 2 //
The first Body is endowed with properties,
[10] Powers and so forth, as (the result of] Liberation,
And the second one, with [32] marks of superman,
As the properties [obtained by] the Maturation (which follows after
Liberation] 11). // 3 //
1) visamyoga, T. bral[-ba], c
.; and vipāka, T. rnam-par smin-pa, C.,
respectively.
Here visamyoga-phala' means the dharmakāya characterized as āvaraṇadvaya-
visamyoga in Chap. II, while ' vipāka-phala' means the rūpakāya characterized as the
result obtained by causes (e.g. practices performed in the previous lives as in the case of
sambhoga-kāya).
8) T. translates 'para' by “pha-rol', but it should be 'gshan-gyi'.
D) sāņketikam vapuh, T. brda-yi sku, C. H FAW (= samvſtikāya).
10) își, T. dran-srori, c. kn * th T. Both T. & C. regard rși" as a plural.
11) vaipākika, T. rnam-smin, C. THE EX (for vaipākika-guna) (that
which represents the enjoyment of bliss as the reward of previous practices). As for the
attribution of qualities to each of the two kāyas, i.e. paramārthakāya and samvrtikāya, C.
says that to the first body, infinite qualities of the Buddha are attributed, while to the
second body, the 10 Powers, etc., are attributed. Attribution of the infinite qualities
to the paramārthakāya accords with the dharmakāya's union with paramārthalak-
şaņas which are indivisible, unthinkable, etc. as told in Chap. II, but as far as the 64 Pro-
erties are concerned, C. attribution does not match the commentary below.
[ 337 ]



XV. 64 PROPERTIES OF THE BUDDHA
Hereafter, the text refers to which are the [10] Powers and other
properties and how they are to be understood 1).
Summary 2)
(Kārikā 2)
The Powers [of the Buddha] are like a thunderbolt,
In [breaking] the hindrance caused by ignorance,
His Intrepidity 3) in the assemblage is like that of a lion,
The Buddha's exclusive properties are like space,
And the two kinds of corporeal forms 4) of the Lord are
Like the moon and its reflection in the water. || 4 ||
(I) THE 10 POWERS
It is said that the Buddha is possessed of [10] Powers (balânvita) 5).
(Kārikās 3-4)
The knowledge of the proper and improper place 6),
Of the result of former actions, and of the faculties 8),
6
1) The reading should be tathā-tad-adhikſtya' instead of tathatām adhikṣtya’.
T. de-ltar deņi dban-du byas-paḥo.
2) T. & C. add the word ' uddāna ’ before the next Kārikā. (T. sdom-ni, C. .
=
3) viſāradatva, T. mi-hjigs-pa, c. FILE WITH
4) dvidhā-darśana, T. bstan-pa rnam gñis, C.
L.
5) Prior to this sentence, C. inserts one sentence showing the following meaning:
Hereafter, the remaining verses in Chap. III expose the 64 properties of the Buddha,
10 Powers and the rest, according to the order mentioned in the previous Kārikā. Its
detailed explanation is to be known according to the Dhāraṇīśvararājasūtra”.
DRS has, however, no explanation about the 32 mahāpuruṣalakṣaṇas. Also C.
changes the order of verses in the commentary (the Kārikā-text is arranged in the same
order as the Skt. text), namely, the verses showing the similes, vajra, simha, ākāśa &
dakacandra, are placed among commentary verses.
6) (1) sthānästhāna, T. gnas dan gnas-min, C. 3. About the 10 balas,
see Mvyut. & DRS 14 c-18 a, AĀS 475 b, RDS 34 a-b.
7) vipāke ca karmaņām (2) karma-vipāka (-jñāna-bala], T. las rnams-kyi rnam-
smin, c. ##...*(reads vipāka and karmaņām separately).
•) indriya = (3) indriya-parāparaſ-jñāna-bala], T. dban-po, c. TR.
[ 338 ]



The Rat nag otra vibb aga
Of the component elements 9) and of the faith 10),
Of the path which leads to everywhere 11), || 5 ||
Of the impurity and purity in contemplation, etc. 12)
Of the memory of the previous abodes 13),
Of the Divine Eyes 14), and of Quiescence 15)
Such are the ten kinds of Power of the Buddha). // 6 /
It is said, [these Powers are] like a thunderbolt 16).
(Kārikā 5)
[Being the power of knowing] about the proper and the improper,
About results, about elements and various faiths of the people,
About the path 17), purity and impurity,
About the complex of faculties, the memory of former abodes,
About the divine eyes, and how to destroy the Evil Influences;
The Powers pierce, break and cut down
The armour, the mountain fortress 18), and the tree of ignorance,
Therefore,
they have resemblance to a thunderbolt 19).
(II) THE 4 FORMS OF INTREPIDITY 20)
It is said that [the Buddha] has attained the 4 kinds of intrepidity
(caturvaiśāradyaprāpta).
(Kārikās 6–7)
[The Buddha's] Intrepidity is of four kinds, namely:
In his perfect Enlightenment of all the elements,
9) dhātu
(4) nānā-dhātu–jñ.-b., T. khams rnams, C. P.
10) adhimukti (5) nânâdhimukti-jñ.-b., T., mos-pa, C. e.
11) mārga sarvatragāmini - (6) sarvatragāmini-pratipaj-jñ.-b., T. kun-hgroņi lam,
c. .
12) dhyānâdi-kleśa-vaimalya, T. bsam-gtan sogs ñon-mons dri-ma med-pa, C.
諸禪定
sarvadhyāna – vimokṣa – samādhi – samāpatti – samkleśa – vyavadāna-
jñ.-6. (7).
13) nivāsânusmrti, T. gnas-ni rjes-su dran-pa, C.
懷念過去世 (8) pūr-
vanivāsânusmộti-jñ.-b.
14) divyā-cakşus, T. Iha-yi mig, c. Fik = (9) cyuty-upapatti-jñ.-b.
16) sānti, T. shi-ba, c. X AP = (10) ásravakşaya-jn-b.
16) C. puts this verse before v. 29.
naya. It stands for mārga.
18) acala-prākāra, T. go-cha rtsig-brtan, c.
19) About the simile of “vajra', see v. I, 4.
20) catur-vaiśāradya. Cf. Mvyut. 8, DRS 18 a-19 a, AĀS 475, RDS 34 b.
17)
[ 339 ]
23



J. TAKASAKI
In rejecting all obstacles,
In preaching the Path, and in acquiring the Extinction 21). || 8 ||
He himself knows 22) and causes others to know
All the things cognizable in all their forms;
He destroy everything to be rejected and causes others to reject
them 23);
Serves [himself and lets others serve) in the method 24) to be practised;
And himself attains and causes others to attain
The Highest and Perfectly Pure State which is to be attained;
Thus, teaching the Truth 25) on account of himself and of others,
The Buddha 26), wherever he might be, is not paralyzed by fear 27).
// 9 ||
It is said that [the intrepidity of the Buddha) is like (that of] a lion 28).
(Kārikā 8)
Just as the king of beasts in the forest
Has always no fear and acts without fear 29) among beasts,
22)
21) The 4 vaiśāradyas are as follows:
1) vaiśāradya in sarvadharmâbhisambodhi, T. chos-kun rdsogs-par byan-chub,
c. XP ;
2) vaiś. in vibandha-pratiședha, T. gegs ni hgog-par byed-pa, c. M;
3) vaiś. in mārgâkhyāna, T. lam-ston-pa, C. ji;
4) vaiś. in nirodhậpti, T. hgog-thob (D's ston is probably a misreading), c. 1
THE M (anāsravâpti).
This order agrees with that in RDS, but Mvyut, and others put the 4th one before
vibandha-pratişedha, under the name of asravakṣaya (-jñāna).
svayam' should be connected with “jñānād', and hence it is to be written with
separation from jñāpanād.
23) hāni-kāraņa-kſti, in the sense hāni- & hānikāraṇa-kſti, T. spans dan spon-mdsad.
C. reading in this and the next phrase is not understandable.
24) vidhi. T. om. it. C. om, the whole phrase of
sevye
vidhau sevanāt'. About
the idea that ' mārga’ is • sevya', see Chap. IV, v. 52. Also these 4, i.e. jñeya, heya,
prāpya and sevya correspond to each of the 4 satyas, respectively.
satya, which denotes the 4-fold āryasatya.
ārya (in plural), T. dran-sron (= psi), C. om.
27) astambhita [-tva], T. thogs-pa med (= apratigha), C. THE (= abhaya). (Cf. astam-
bhin, adj. not paralyzed by fear, BHS Dic.). For this, BHS & Pāli form is 'accham-
bhita', which is parallel to
abhita', 'asamtrasta or “ asamvigna (BHS Dic. s. v.) and
more or less synonymous with viśārada'. (chambh Skt. stambh, to fix ').
28) C. (in the commentary) puts the following verse before v. 32.
20) anuttarasta-gati, T. skrag-pa med-par rgyu-ba, C. & # (for gati, T. rgyu-ba
carati).
25)
26)
2
[ 340 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
Similarly, the lion who is the Lord of Sages
Abides among the assembly of attendance,
Independently 30), indifferently31), with firmness and victory 32). //10//
(III) THE 18 EXCLUSIVE PROPERTIES 33)
It is said that the Buddha is endowed with the 18 Exclusive Pro-
perties peculiar only to him (astādaśâveņikabuddhadharmasamanvāgata).
34)
36)
(Kārikās 9-13)
With the Preceptor,
There is neither error nor rough speech 35),
Neither loss of memory
nor distraction of mind 37),
Also, there is no pluralistic conception 38);- // 11 //
He is not indifferent, nor without consideration 39)
He knows no deprivation of his zeal 40), and of his energy 41),
Of his memory 42), of Transcendental Intellect 43), and of Libe-
ration 44)
so) svastha, T. legs-gnas (= susthita), C. * (su-sthita).
31) nirāstha, T. ltos-med, C. T (without fear).
32) sthira-vikramastha. T. regards it as one adjective (brtan-paủi rtsal
.), but
acc. to comm. verse (v. 34) and C., it is to be read sthirastha & vikramastha ', c. U
& ill, respectively. For these 4 adjectives, see vv. 33–34.
33) For the 18 āveņikadharmas, see Mvyut. 9, DRS 19 a-21b, AĀS 475 b, RDS 34 b f.
34) skhalita, T. ḥkhrul, c. ;
→ nāsti skhalitam (1).
35) ravita, T. ca-co, C.
→ n. ravitam (2).
30) muşitā smộti, T. dran-pa nams, c. E(3).
37) asamāhita citta, T. mñam-par ma bshag thugs, C.
TÉ like
(4).
nānātva-samjñitā, T. ḥdu-ses sna-tshogs, C. 種種諸想
→ (5).
39) upekşâpratisamkhyā (apratisamkhyāya is a BHS form for -yāyām (fem. loc.)
of Skt.), T. ma brtags btan-sñoms, c. JIE PE L (6).
40) chanda, T. ḥdun-pa, C. P ... nāsti chandasya (or-taḥ) hāniḥ (7).
•1) vīrya, T. brtson-hgrus, C. * ..
...n. viryataḥ h. (8).
42) smrti, T. dran-pa, C. ... 1. smſteủ h. (9).
43) prajñā, T. śes-rab, c. ... n. prajñayā h. (10).
44) vimukti, T. rnam-grol, - * ...
...n. vimukter h. (11).
38)
C.
[ 341 ]



J. TAKASAKI
50)
53)
And of the intuition of this liberation 45); -- // 12 //
His [three kinds of] acts 46) are preceded by Wisdom 47),
And his Intuition acts unimpededly in three states of time 48);
These 18 and others 49) are the Properties
Of the Preceptor, which are not common to others. 1! 13 ||
The Sage has neither error nor rough speech,
Neither loses [his memory] nor distracts his mind 51),
Has neither pluralistic views 52) nor indifference to one's own
taste,
He is never deprived of his zeal, effort and memory,
Of pure, immaculate Intellect and Liberation,
Of the intuition of freedom 54) and of showing all things knowable;
// 14 /
He makes manifest on the objects the 3 kinds of acts 55)
Which are preceded by 56) all kinds of knowledge,
And brings out the Wisdom, well extensive, without hindrance 57)
Constantly, throughout the 3 states of time;
Thus is Buddhahood 58), endowed with Great Compassion,
45)
49)
vimuktijñānadarśana, T. rnam-grol-gyi ye-ſes-gzigs-pa, C.
.解脫知見
.. (12). Mvyut. & DRS instead have ‘nāsti samādher hāniḥ (C. Tik).
46) karman, T. las, c. . There are 3 kinds of “ karman’, i.e. k. by kāya, by
vāk & by manas, and they stand for (13)–(15).
47) jñāna-pūrvamgama, T. ye-śes son-hgro, C. *.
48) try-adhvan, T. om. tri and simply, dus. C. = 'jñāna’ acting in each state
of time, i.e. atita, anāgata & pratyutpanna, is counted separately and consists (16)-(18)
of the āveņikadharma.
dan gs
anye ca, T.
gshan, C.
及餘不說者, It i uncertain which are
counted by this word 'anye '.
50) praskhalita
skhalita,
51) The reading should be ' mușitatâcitte’ (as a Dvandva-comp., dual, nom., i.e.
muşitatā & acitta) instead of 'mușitatā citte ' in the text. “acitta’ here stands for asa-
māhita-citta. (T. bsñel dan thugs-g'yo).
na sambhedataḥ samjñā, (sambhedataḥ nānātva-)T. tha-dad-kyi ni ħdus-ses.
53) abhyupekṣaņa upekṣā.
54) T. om. nidarśana of muktijñāna-nidarśana (reading apparently ‘vimuktij-
ñānadarśanāt).
55) In place of 'artheșu ', T. has ‘yasya ’.
56) purojava, T. sñon-hgro (= purvamgama), C.
purvamgama), C. ... *.
57) aparāhata, T. thogs-med, C. SHE BEU.
58) jinatā, T. rgyal-pa-ñid, c. kp K.
=
52)
[ 342]



The Rat na gotravibhāg a
And perfectly realized 59) by the Buddha;
And on account of this realization, he sets in motion in the world
The great wheel of the fearless 60) Supreme Doctrine. || 15 ||
It is said that [these properties are] like space 61).
(Kārikā 14)
The nature 62) found in the earth and the rest
Is not the nature of space,
And the properties of space represented by
Non-obstruction, etc., are absent in material things 63);
The earth, water, fire, wind and the sky 64), likewise,
Are common to all the [material] worlds,
But the Exclusive Properties of the Buddha
Are not in the least 65) common to those worlds. || 16 ||
(IV) THE 32 MARKS OF THE SUPERMAN 66)
It is said that the Buddha is possessed of the corporeal form endowed
with the 32 marks of the Superman (dvātrimśanmahāpuruşalakṣaṇarūpa-
dhārin).
59) For “ avabuddhā', T. brñes (avalabdha), but C. as in the text.
60) The reading “abhayadam' is to be corrected into “abhayam' (one syllable is in
excess). So T. hjigs-med, and c. Fue ful xl (Lit. it is an adjective to cakra).
Cf. v. I. 4. (abhayam mārgam dideśa).
61) C. (in the commentary) puts the following verse before v. 35.
62) dharmatā, T. chos-ñid, c. X.
63) rūpin, T. gzugs, C. (that which has form).
64) C. om. the word for sky from this line of elements, sothat the sky is to be
distinguished from the other elements. Did the author of this Kārikā regard the sky
as something material unlike · space' which, in its turn, is compared to the Buddha's
āveņikadharma in the first two lines ?
65) āśv api. T. dul phran tsam, C. Jy SE — X (even not a single dharma).
T. om. “ buddha ' of “ buddhāveņikatā, for which ckp HIT
WIJ H.
66) Of the 32 mahāpuruşalakṣaṇas, see Mvyut. 17, AĀS 474 a-b, RDS 37 b-c. Also
cf. AA, AAA Chap. VIII, The Prajñāpāramitā śāstra de attributed to Nā-
gārjuna. Of those in the Ratna., see V. S. Agrawala, The Thirty-two Marks of the Buddha-
Body, Journal of the Oriental Institute, M. S. University of Baroda, vol. I, No. 1. Sept.
1951, Baroda, pp. 20–22.
[ 343 ]



J. TAKASAKI
(Kārikās 15-23)
The feet are firmly placed, marked by circles on the soles,
And with broad insteps and leveled heels which hide the ankles 67)
The fingers are long 68), and those of hands and toes alike
Are connected with each other by a web 69) // 17 ||
His skin is soft and fine like that of youths 70)
His body is round with 7 elevated parts 71),
His shanks are like those of the deer 72), and
The private parts are concealed as with an elephant 73). // 18 //
The upper part of the body is like that of a lion 74),
The parts between the shoulders are closely set and elevated 75)
68)
67) supratisthita-cakránka-vyāyatôtsanga-pādatā (1), which contains actually 4 marks
on feet, namely: 1) supratişthita-pādatā), T. legs-gnas (lori), c. ETFW (flat
the feet); 2) cakrârika-p., T. ḥkhor los mtshan-pa, C. LEFE; 3) vyāyata-p.,
T. yans- (cf. AAĀ, āyata-pārşņitā); & 4) utsarga-p., T. mi-mnon ('not evident ’, “hidden'),
C. for 3) & 4) IR ANE DE E B. (but th: 3) E IRWE * &
4) E B ). For · utsanga ’, AAA & Mvyut., uccharka (or ucсhankha), which
is an equivalent form of Pāli ussankha' and which retains the original meaning
of this peculiar mark. T. translation mi-mñon' matches better ucchařka than
utsanga'. The formó utsanga' is, therefore, probably a wrong Sanskritization of Pāli
'ussankha'. C. traditional interpretation of this mark also supports this sense of hidden
ankles.
dirghôngulikatā (2), T. sor-mo rin, C. 諸指皆織長,
69) jālapānipādāvanaddhatā (3), T. phyag-shabs rin dra-ba-yis ni ħbrel-pa, C. Po
EM .
tvanmrdusritaruņatā (4), T. pags-ħjam gshon-sa-can legs-ñid, C. FE
* (instead of · tvak’, C. has' hasta-pāda’. It agrees with AAA & Mvyut.). T.
gshon-sa-can (for taruna) has the meaning, one who has flesh of youth'.
71) saptôtsada-sariratā (5), T. sku ni bdun-dag mtho-ba, c. 1 * to
7 utsadas are namely: 2 hastas, 2 padas, 2 skandhas & 1 grīva.
72) eneya-janghatā (6), T. byin-pa enaya-hdra, c. {* E JEEP
nāgakośavad-vastiguhyatā (7), T. gsan glan-po bshin-du sbubs-su nub, C. I
ME JE
70) simhapūrvârdha-kāyatva (8), T. ro-stod sen-ge ḥdra-ba, C. E. 4 km Gii F.
75) nirantara-citâmšatā (9), T. thal-gon bar-med rgyas-pa, c. te til MTB
Cf. AAA citântarâmśatā. T. thal-gon (for amśa) means the part between shoulder and
collar (gon-pa, collar). C. often interprets it as indicating 'arm
arm-pit ’ () WE TW
AAS).
70)
ei
73)
[ 344 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhāga
78)
And his shoulders are well heaped and round 76);
His arms are fleshy, tender and of no unevenness 77), // 19 //
And are hanging low [down to the knees]
The body has a radiant, pure halo around it 79),
His neck is immaculate like a white conch 80),
And his jaws have a resemblance with those of a lion 81). // 20 //
He has forty teeth all of which are equal 82),
And are clear and closely set 83), pure and straight 84),
And his eye-teeth are white and of excellent form 85). || 21 ||
His tongue is broad and long 86), [by which he tastes]
The highest taste, infinite and unthinkable 87);
The voice of the Self-Born is like that of the Kalavinka 88)
And has the most excellent sound 89). || 22 ||
76) samvrtta-skandhată (10), T. dpun-pa legs-zlum, c. Tij sij F.
77) vịttaślakşņânunnāma-bāhutā (11), T. phyag-hjam rin zlum-shin mthon dman-med-
pa, C. WET ANF. This is not mentioned in AAÃ. Mvyut. counts this mark
along with the next one saying “sthitânavanata-pralamba-bāhutā.
78) pralamba-bāhutā (12), T. phyag rin C. F B H.
79) śuddhaprabhāmaņdala-gātratā (13), T. yons-su dag-paḥi ḥod-kyi dkyil-ḥkhor dag
dan ldan (om. gātra), C. $ 1 i.
80) kambu-grivatvam amalam (14), T. mgrin-pa dri-med dun-ḥdra, c. 1 kp FL
I. I
This is lacking in AAA, Mvyut., as well as in RDS.
81) mrgêndra-hanutā (15), T. hgram-pa ri-dags rgyal-po ḥdra, c. I tilliti F.
82) samā catvārimśad-daśanatā (16), T. tshems ni bshi-bcu mñam-pa, C. O PL
that
svacchâvirala-dantatā (17), T. rab-dans tshems thags bzan-ba, C.
深密內
B. HF.
viśuddhasama-dantatva (18), T. rnam-dag tshems mñam-ñid, C.
am-dag tshems mñam-ñid, C. ET
ph
85) śukla-pravara-damstratā (19), T. mche-ba rab-mchog dkar-ba-ñid, c. 5
In. This is lacking in AAA & Mvyut.
86) prabhūta-jihvatā (20), T. ljags rin, c. H I.
87) ananiâcintya-rasarasâgratā (21), T. mthaḥ-med bsam-med-pa ro bro-ba-yi mchog-
ñid (T. seems to regard “anantâcintya’ as adjectives for the previous one), c. HIT
DE EU, 1 o* + Euk.
88) kalavinka-ruta (22), T. kalabinka-yi sgra, C.
ihn e Win P. AAA, Mvyut.,
RDS om. it.
30) brahma-svaratā (23), T. tshans-pași dbyans-ñid, c. flere
83)
84)
[ 345 ]



J. TAKASAKI
He, the highest of living beings 90), is of beautiful eyes, like a blue-
lotus, with eyelashes like those of a bull 91),
Of handsome face, endowed with the immaculate Ürņa-hair 92),
Of a head adorned with the Uşņīşa 93), and of skin,
Purified, subtle and of golden colour 94); // 23 //
Hairs on the body grow separately from each other,
Soft and subtle, turning upward and to the right 95),
Hairs on his head are of pure blue colour like sapphires 96)
And his figure is fully circular like a Nyagrodha tree 97). // 24 //
He, the Great Sage, whose body is firm and possessed of
of Nārāyaṇa 98)
98), looks sublime and incomparable 99);
The power
90)
agrasattva, which is a synonym of the Buddha and not one of the marks'
at all.
91) nilótpalasti-vrsapakşma-netra (24). This actually consists of two marks, na-
mely:
1) nilotpalala śri-netra, T. spyan-bzans utpala, c. = # Ú... The film
$ ##;
2) vrşa-pakşma-netra, T. khyu-mchog rdsi-ḥdra[-spyan], C. DAR E.
92) sitâmalôrņôdita-cāruvaktra (25), T. shal-mdses dri-med mdsod spu dkar-bar
Idan, c. *T E É È , UT HE HA ;
»s) uşnişa-śīrșa (26), T. gtsug-tor dbu-Idan, C. TI E .
94) vyavadātasükşma-suvarņavarna-cchaviḥ (27), T. dag-cin srab-pa dan pags-pa
gser-gyi mdog-hdra, C. F#, , KHL
AAĀ counts this one as two.
95) ekaikavislista-mydu-ūrdhvadeha-pradaksiņâvarta-sūkşma-roma (28). T. ba-sphu
legs phra, hjam shin, re-re-nas, sku-yi gyen-du g’yas phyogs ḥkhil-ba, C. - FL
, U* E. B. The u tite. This is originally of 3 marks as
C. translation, i.e. 1) ekaikaviślişta; 2) ürdhvadehâvarta; & 3) pradakșiņā-āvartu.
96) mahendra-nilamala-ratnakeśa (29), T. dbu-skra dri-med rin-chen mthor mthin-
bshin, C., BE . This is lacking in AAA.
97) nyagrodha-pūrņadruma-mandalabha. (30), T. ñya-gro rdsogs-paḥi ljon sin dkyil--
ḥkhor hdra, C. $ ANF # # , # E Pag het I.
98) nārāyaṇasthāma-dụdhâtmabhāva (31), T. sred-med-bu-yi stobs mňaḥ (sred-med-bu
means Vişņu), c. Et fint , kp #RUE BE. AAA & Mvyut. have not
got this mark.
samantabhadrâpratima (-ātmabhāva) (32), T. kun-tu bzan-po dpe-med, C. 普身
TT (which reads apratigha for apratima). It is doubtful whether this stands
for one of the 32 marks or not. C. does not count it among the marks. T. is not
clear. And no other text includes it among the 32 marks.
99)
( 346 )



The Ratnag otra vibhāga
These 32 features of infinite splendour are taught
By the Preceptor as the marks 100) of the Lord of Men. || 25 ||
It is said that [the Buddha, with 32 marks] has a resemblance to
the moon and its reflection in the water 101).
(Kārikā 24)
Just as, in autumn, the form 102) of the moon is perceived
In the cloudless sky, as well as in a big pond,
Reflecting this blue sky on its water-surface;
Similarly, the disciples of the Buddha
Can perceive the manifestations of the Omnipresent
On the surface of the pond-like sphere of the Buddha. // 26 //
Thus these 10 Powers of the Buddha, 4 kinds of Intrepidity, 18 Ex-
clusive Properties of the Buddha, as well as the 32 Marks of the Super-
man, being united under one head, make up the number sixty-four.
These 64 properties are to be understood,
Along with their causes for attainment,
One after the other, according to [the same] order,
Through the investigation of the Ratna-sūtra 103). // 27 ||
Now, of these 64 properties of the Buddha, which have been explained
above, the detailed exposition is to be known , according to the same or-
der as before, through the investigation of the Ratnadārikā-sūtra.
Also, there have been made illustrations of four kinds about these
[4] points, respectively, viz. examples of a thunderbolt, a lion, the
space, and the moon reflected in the water. Of these examples, the
summarized meaning will be given in the following 12 verses.
103)
100) cihna, T. mtshan, C. (= lakṣaṇa).
101) dakacandra, C. 7K + , T. chu-zla.
102) vibhūti, T. gzugs (= bimba, rūpa), C. J. C. puts this Kārikā before v. 37.
Ratnadārikāsūtra, T. bu-mo rin-po-cheḥi mdo, c.
There are
two translations of this sūtra in C.:
1) * tChap. III of the Mahā-
samnipātasūtra), Taisho, XIII, pp. 28 b-40 b. This one is used here for reference with
the abbreviation of RDS ;
2) H H (Ratnadărikā-pariprcchā), Taisho, No. 399, vol. XIII,
pp. 452-472.
[ 347 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Being (respectively] impenetrable 104), with no misery 105),
Perfectly unique 106) and indifferent 107),
[The Buddha's Properties) are illustrated
By the examples of the thunderbolt, the lion, the space
And of the clear moon with her reflection in the water. || 28 ||
Of the [10] Powers, six, three, and one,
Taken respectively, remove all [the obscurations]
On account of the knowable, the concentrations,
And of defilements with their potential forces. || 29 ||
As if they were piercing an armour,
Breaking a wall, and cutting down a tree,
The Powers of the Sage are like a thunderbolt,
Being heavy, solid, firm and unbreakable 108). // 30 /
Why are they “heavy’? Because they are
solid ’;
Why are they 'solid '? Because they are
firm ';
Why are they “firm'?
firm'? Because they are unbreakable ?
And being unbreakable’, they are like a thunderbolt 109).
|| 31 ||
Being fearless, being indifferent,
Being firm and accomplishing victory,
The lion of Sages is like a [real] lion,
Has no fear amidst the assembly of audiences 110). // 32 ||
104) nirvedhikatva, T. mi-phyed-pa, c. Ti jo (breakable, in the sense that the
thunderbolt can break everything).
105) nirdainya, T. mi-shan, C. FEL (without mercy, which is not a proper
translation).
106) nişkaivalya, T. mtshuns-pa med, c. 1 # 1 (niḥ' in the sense of “atyanta”).
107) niriha, T. gʻyo-med (immovable), C. SIE U indifferent). The reflection is
avikalpa and nirihaka (cf. Chap. IV, v. 19).
guru, T. brlin (D. glin is a mistake), C. 1 ; sāra, T. sñin, C
.; drdha,
T. brtan, c. H ; & abhedya, T. mi-byed, c. Ti nuk , respectively.
109) C. neglects the first 3 padas of v. 31.
parşad-gaņa C. adds one more verse before v. 32, indicating the 4-fold
āryasatya, which makes the analogy quite clear. It runs as follows:
知病苦知因遠離彼苦因說聖道妙藥 為離病證滅,
108)
110)
(The Buddha, having known the duḥkha of sickness and its hetu, and having been
devoid of duḥkha-hetu, preaches the āryamārga, that is an excellent medicine, in order
to cause the people to remove sickness and to realize the nirodha).
[ 348 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
As he has got all the supernatural faculties,
He abides “independently’111) from any fear 112),
He is 'indifferent' [about his superiority),
As he is unequal by nature even to the people of purity 113).
// 33 //
He stands firmly 'since his mind is always
Concentrated on all the elements of existence,
And he is of the highest victory'
Since he has transcended the Dwelling Place of Ignorance. || 34 ||
With the worldlings 114), with the Srāvakas,
With those that act in solitude 115), with the Wise,
And with the Buddha, the Intellect is subtler with one after the
[other;
Therefore, we have illustrations in five kinds 116). // 35 ||
[The first four are] like the earth, water, fire and wind,
Because they sustain all the world,
[But the Buddha) has a resemblance to space,
Because his characters surpass everything mundane and supermun-
dane. || 36 ||
These 32 Properties mentioned above
Represent the Body of the Absolute,
Since they are indivisible from it,
As with a gem, the lustre, colour and shape. // 37 ||
[On the other hand], the 32 marks are
The properties, visible and causing delight 117) in the body,
And are based on the two Corporeal Bodies
The Apparitional Body and the Body enjoying the Truth. // 38 ||
To those who are far from purity and near to it,
The pure manifestation of the Corporeal Body is twofold,
113) 6
111) svastha, T. rnam-par gnas, C. * L.
112) akutobhaya, T. gan-las kyaň hjigs-med, C. — UJJ et al.
Indifference in the sense that he does not try to see whether he is superior
or inferior. For this line, C. WHYTE E * F & D E
無等 (ātma-asama-darśanataḥ). E is
probably for nirāstha'.
114) C. om. laukika.
115) ekānta-cărin, T. mthah-gcig-su spyod, c. 11. It denotes the Pratyeka-
buddha.
116) C. takes · -pañcadhă tu as if “ pañca-dhātu (fi. t = pañca-mahābhūta).
111) ahlādaka, T. tshim-byed, c. .
[ 349 ]



J. TAKASAKI
[One is] in the World, and [the other) in the circle of the Buddha,
Just as the moon shows her form in both the sky and the water 118).
// 39
Finished is the third chapter entitled “the Properties of the Buddha',
in the ANALYSIS OF THE GERM OF THE JEWELS, a Treatise on
the Ultimate Doctrine of the Great Vehicle.
118) C. adds one verse more after v. 39, whose content is almost the same as v. 37,
the difference is only the use of the word “rūpakāya' in place of dharmakāya '.
[ 350 ]



CHAPTER IV.
THE ACTS OF THE BUDDHA 1)
4. JINAKRIYA
XVI. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ACTS
OF THE BUDDHA
6
We have finished the explanation of the “ Immaculate Properties of
the Buddha'. Now we shall speak of the functions (associated with those
Properties], i. e. ' the Acts of the Buddha'. They are said to be mani-
fested in two modes, i. e. without effort' (anābhogataḥ), and uninter-
ruptedly' (apraśrabdhitaḥ). [Therefore] immediately there follow two 2)
ślokas referring to the Buddha's Acts which are characterized as
effort and interruption' (anābhogậpraśrabdha).
of no
(Kārikās 1-2)
The acts of the Lord 3) are always effortless
With regard to the constitution of the converts 4).
The means of conversion, and its 5) functions
[In accordance with the capacity] of the converts,
Working in [proper) place and in [proper) time6). || 1 ||
Having completely established the Vehicle 7),
1) AĀS has a chapter of the same title (Tathāgatakriyā-parivarta), but it has noth-
ing to associate with RGV in its contents.
2) T. om. dvau.
s) vibhu, T. khyab-bdag, C. ON.
4) vineyadhātu, T. gdul-byaḥi khams, c. 1
5) T. reads vineyakriyā for vinayakriyā.
6) taddeśakāle gamane ca. For “gamana', T. gśegs-pa (going). For the whole
phrase,
c. 1 of l (in accordance with proper place and time).
7) Par excellence, it denotes the Mahāyāna.
So, c. *. For nişpădya,
c. 11.
[ 351 ]



J. TAKASAKI
The ocean
8) of knowledge filled with the multitudes of the excel-
lent virtues,
And endowed with the rays of the sun of Merits and Know-
ledge),
And having perceived that Buddhahood 10), like space,
Pervading extensively and of neither limit nor middle,
Exists everywhere 11) in all living beings
As the treasure 13) of the immaculate virtues,
The Buddhas' Compassion, like wind,
Blows away the net of the cloud-like [Obscurations]
Caused by Defilements and Ignorance. // 2 //
12)
The summarized meaning of these two ślokas is to be known by the
following two and eight verses, respectively.
To whom, by what means, how far 14), and when,
About these matters, there is no rise of discrimination;
Therefore, the Buddha's Act of conversion
Is [working) always without effort'. // 3 //
On account of the action of conversion 15),
• Who' means
the constitution 16) be converted,
* By what means ’17) denotes
• 17) denotes the manifold means (of conversion] ’,
And where and when ’, the place and time' [of conversion] ’.
// 4 //
Because, [this act of conversion is] non-discriminative
6
to
9)
5) ratna-svagarbha, T. chu-misho (ocean), c. th K **. The Ocean is usually
said to be the “ treasure of jewels
punya and jñāna are called the two sambhāras (accumulation that brings about
the Enlightenment, c. ** *1). The compound should be separated after
raśmi and before pravisrta. C. misreads this passage and connects it with the next
• buddhatva'.
10) For buddhatva, c. .
11) nirviśistam, T. khyad-med, c. il.
sarvasattva (sattva in a collective sense) sattvadhātu.
13) nidhi, T. gter, C. . It has a sense similar to ·gotra’ (mine), or “garbha '.
14) yāvat, which stands for “yatra' in the next verse.
15) vinīti-kriyā, T. gdul-byaḥi bya, C. WE * X.
16) For dhātu, C. TR constitution, faculty).
17) Instead of upāya, C
C.
in v. 3) (jñāna) ...(yena jñānena), and
om, bhūriņā.
12)
[ 352 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
With regard to Deliverance 18) and its support 19),
To the result of [partaking of] this support and the receptacle 20)
which accepts this result,
And to the obscurations (which cover] this receptacle and the con-
dition by which these obscurations are removed. || 5 ||
[Here] Deliverance' means the 10-fold Stage [of Bodhisattvas),
Its cause ' means the 2-fold Accumulation 21),
The result of this Accumulation' is the Highest Enlightenment,
* [Its) receptacle' means the living beings
Who accept the Enlightenment 22). || 6 ||
The phrase “ The obscurations which cover this receptacle ' means
The innumerable Defilements, Sub-defilements and Impressions;
The phrase "The condition by which the obscurations are removed
And which works for all time means Compassion. // 7||
These six points are to be known,
Like the ocean and like the sun,
Like space and like a treasure,
Like clouds and like the wind, respectively. // 8 //
Being [the treasure of the water of knowledge
And of the jewel of virtuous properties,
The highest Vehicle 23) is like the ocean;
As keeping alive all living beings,
The twofold Accumulation is like the sun; || 9 ||
Being extensive and of neither end nor middle,
The Enlightenment has a resemblance to space;
Being of the nature of the Perfect Enlightened One 24),
18) niryāņa, T. nes-ħbyin, C. ! HX (to enter the path, ). It stands for
' yāna’ in the Kārikā.
19) upastambha (in the sense, that which causes “ niryāna '), T. rton-pa, C. IJ .
Hereafter, the pronoun tad' in each case, denotes the preceding one.
20) parigraha, T. yons-hdsin, C. the Te (Mi in v. 6) parigraha’ is here used
in the sense of ' nidhi' (that which contains something).
21) sambhști-dvaya, viz. punya-sambhāra & jñāna-s. The former includes those
pāramitās of 'dāna, sila, kşānti, virya & dhyāna', and the latter, that of ‘prajñā’.
For sambhrti, C. (satya).
bodheḥ sattvaḥ parigrahaḥ, T. byan-chub-sems-can yońs-su ḥdsin, C. 攝菩提
### for sattva). Here the living beings are called bodhisattva
sense of those who accept (pari- Vgrah) the 'bodhi ’.
23) agrayāna. But T. & C. read bhūmayaḥ' (T. sa-rnams, c. ).
24) samyaksambuddha-dharmatvāt, T. yan-dag-rdsogs-sans-chos-ñid-phyir, C. Hall
m * E.
22)
in the
[ 353 ]



J. TAKASAKI
25)
The living beings are akin to a treasure 26); // 10 ||
Being accidental, pervasive, and unreal 27),
Their defilements are like a multitude of clouds;
And, bringing about 28) the dispelling of these,
Compassion is like a strong wind. // 11 ||
Performing Deliverance for the sake of others,
Considering the living beings as one's own self 29)
And having works of no termination, [The Buddha)
Acts uninterruptedly' as long as the world exists. || 12 ||
25) sattvadhātu.
26) nidhāna, T. gter, C. AU # E (treasure under the ground).
27) anispatti, T. ma-grub, C. e . For vyāpi, C. ŁJ), and regards it as
an adverb to anispatti (unreal everywhere).
pratyupasthāna, T. ñer-gnas, c. te.
29) Cf. the Avatamsakasūtra. (note VI-28) C. puts these two phrases after v. 10,
adding the following phrases before them:猶如彼大地體安固不動,
28)
[ 354 )



XVII. 9 ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE BUDDHA'S ACTS
§ 1. Buddha's Magnanimity.
It was said that Buddhahood is characterized 1) as having neither
origination nor extinction. Being such, how is it possible that from such
an immutable Buddhahood, characterized as of no manifestation 2),
the Acts of Buddha manifest in this world, without effort, without
discriminination, without interruption, and as long as the world exists ?
[To answer this question], in order to produce the faith in the sphere of
the Buddha on the part of those people who have misconception and doubt
about the Buddha's nature of magnanimity 3), we have one śloka with
regard to this magnanimous character of the Buddha.
(Kārikā 3)
Like Indra, like the divine drum,
Like clouds, like Brahmā, and like the sun,
Like the wish-fulfilling gem, like an echo,
Like space and like the earth,
Such is the Buddha [in his acts]"). // 13 //
1) prabhāvita, T. rab-tu phye-ba.
2) apravſtti-lakșana, c. T LETT X.
3) For māhātmya, C. * *(prob. for mahäkriyā).
** (mahāyāna-kriyā).
In the Kārikā text, C. says
4)
names of the 9 similes in S. T. & C. are as follows:
1) sakra, T. rgya-byin, C
.;
2) [deva] dundubhi, T. [lhaḥi] rňa, c. If they ;
3) megha, T. sprin, c. 2;
4) [mahā] brahman, T. tshařs-pa [chen-po], c. **;
5) arka (surya), T. ñi-ma, C. HỆ
6) maņiratna (cintāmaņi), T. nor-bu rin-chen, C. DE E;
7) pratiśruti (pratiśrutka-śabda), T. sgra-brñan c. ;
8) ākāśa, T. nam-mkhaḥ C.
9) prthivi, T. sa, C. U.
[ 355 ]
24



J. TAKASAKI
§ 2. 9 Illustrations taken from the Jñānâlokālańkārasūtra.
Now, of this śloka which represents the topics in the Scripture 5),
a detailed exposition will be given topic by topic in the remaining part
of the text according to the same order.
(I) It is said that [the Buddha has] a resemblance to the form of Indra 6).
(Kārikās 4-20)
Suppose here were a surface
Made of an immaculate Vaiļūrya stone,
And, owing to its clarity, there were seen on it
The chief of the gods, with the multitude of Apsaras 8), // 14 //
As well as his great place 9) called Vaijayanta,
Other gods 10) and their various dwellings
Along with their divine glories 11). // 15 //
Suppose then, the multitudes of men and women
Abiding on this surface of the earth,
Would perceive this vision
And make the following prayer : // 16 //
May we too, at an early date 12),
Become like that chieftain of the gods !
And, in order to obtain 14) that state,
99 13)
5) sūtrasthāniya [ sloka), T. mdoħi gnas lta-buḥi (tshigs-su-bcad-pa], c. PLEŤ
Le (119) (sūtrârthasamgraha-śloka).
6) Cf. JĀA 240 b-c.
Text reading “-pratibhāsatvād iti ’ is to be corrected into ' -pratibhāsavad iti'.
7) Hereafter, the arrangement of Kārikās varies much between C. & S. (T. agrees
with S.). Some Kārikās in each simile are missing in C. while C. has more than three
verses which are not available in S. (see my Introduction, II-2) Mention will be done
in each case about omission and addition in C., and the verse number in C. Kārikā text.
(Prior to this passage, in Chap. IV, we have three verses in C. Kārikā text which are
equivalent to vv. 1, 2, & 13 in S. Consequently, in the following passages, C. Kārikā
number starts with No. 4). C. om. vv. 14–26.
8) For apsaras, T. lhaḥi bu-mo.
9) prāsāda, T. khan-bzans. For Vaijayanta, T. rnam-par-rgyal-ba.
10) divaukas, T. lha-gnas. (One whose residence is in heaven).
11) vibhūti, T.
rnam-man.
12) The reading should be vayam apy acirād' instead of .adyaiva na cirād' in S.
T. ned kyan rin-por mi-thogs-par (rin-por mi-thogs-par after a little while, in a
short time. Jäschke's Dictionary, p. 528 s. v.).
13) tridaśêśvara, T. Iha-dban (devêndra).
14) samādāya, T. yandag-blañs te.
[ 356 ]



The Rat nag otra vibhāg a
They would abide adopting the virtues. || 17 ||
Though having no notice that this is merely a vision,
They, owing to their virtuous conduct,
Would pass away from the earth 15) and be borne to heaven. // 18 //
After all, it is an illusion,
Of no thought-construction and no activity 16);
Nevertheless, it would appear on the earth,
Being associated with a great benefit. || 19 ||
In the same way, the living beings,
If they were pure in their faith and so forth,
And were endowed with 17) virtues, faith and the like,
Would perceive in their own minds the vision of the Buddha, // 20 ||
Who is endowed with the visible features and marks 18)
Who acts in manifold actual behavior like
Walking, standing, sitting and sleeping 19), // 21 //
Preaching the Doctrine of Quiescence, being silent,
Abiding in concentration of mind and showing
The various miracles 20), and who has the great glory. || 22 ||
Having seen him, the people who are filled with desire,
Undertake the attainment of the Buddhahood,
And, having brought the factors to development
They do attain the desired state 21). || 23 ||
After all, it is an illusion,
Of
no thought-construction and no activity;
Nevertheless, it appears in the world,
Being associated with a great benefit. || 24 ||
Ordinary people do not notice
That this is merely a reflection of their own mind 22);
Still this manifestation of the Buddha's features
16) bhū, T. sa-sten (for abl, in S., T. reads as loc.).
16) nirihaka, T. g'yo-ba-med.
17) For bhāvita, T. sgom-pa (bhāvanā).
18) vyañjana, T. dpe-byad. laksaņa-vyañjana' signifies 32 mahāpuruṣalakſaņas
and the 80 anuvyañjanas.
19) cankramyamāņa, tişthat, nişaņņa & sayanasthita, T. ḥchag-pa, bshens-pa,
bshugs-pa & gzims-pa (Cf. c. TT LÈ AEN). These are called 'Eryāpatha' (T. spyod
lam, C. El fet).
prātihārya, T. cho-hphrul. There are said to be 3 prātihāryas. See below.
21) Epsitam padam, T. ḥdod-paḥi go-hphan, namely 'bodhi'.
22) This is an expression of the ' cittamātra’ theory. We have a similar expression
in Lank. (svacittadựśyamātra...).
20)
[ 357 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Is useful for 23) fulfilling their aim. || 25 ||
Indeed, those who, having seen this vision,
Have gradually established themselves in this method 24),
Perceive, with the eyes of transcendental wisdom,
The Body of the Highest Truth 25) within themselves 26). // 26 //
Suppose, the earth, having become completely free from uneven-
ness 27)
And having become pure from within 28), would be as clear and white
As the Vaidūrya stone, [because of its] being possessed of
The immaculate qualities of jewel and of pure even surface;
And, owing to its purity, there would appear on its (surface]
The palace of Indra 29) occupied by gods around him 30) as a vision,
But, as this earth would gradually lose its qualities,
The vision [thereof] would subsequently disappear 31). // 27 ||
For obtaining that state, the multitudes of men and women,
Whose mind intends to perform charity and the rest,
Through observing rules regarding fast and conduct 32)
Would scatter flowers with minds full of sublime desire 33).
Similarly, for obtaining the shadow of the Lord of Sages 34)
On their mind which is radiant like the Vaidurya stone,
The sons of the Buddha, with minds full of delight,
28)
23) avandhya (not barren), T. don-yod [hgyur] (sārtha).
24) For naya, T. theg-pa (yāna). There is not so much difference in its sense. It
denotes “mahāyāna '.
25) saddharmakāya.
26) madhyastha, T. nan-gi.
27) samanta-vyapagatavişamasthāna, T. kun dman-paḥi gnas gshan dan bral (includ-
ing antar by reading antara as other '), c. E T. C. puts this verse after
v. 30.
antar amalā. One Avagraha should be inserted between sthānā and antar-.
(sthānā‘ntaramalā).
20) surapati, c. *, T. not clear (lha-dag is a mistake for lha-bdag?
30) māhendramarutā. For this
passage,
lha-dag
gnas-tshogs lha-dban lha-hi
gzugs-śar te (which reads bhavana in pl. and seems to om, marutā), C. 天主鏡像現
BIE W LX.
31) C., K 6.
32) upavāsa-vrata-niyamatayā, T. bsñen-gnas (upavāsa), brtul-shugs (vrata), -nes-par,
c. PLE TT **T, Hal.
praņihita-manas, T. smon-paħi sems, C. RK ?
34) muni-pati (= buddha), T. thub-dban.
I.
33)
[ 358 ]



The Rat na gotravibhāga
Produce various pictures 35) [showing the Buddha's life, etc.] 36)
// 28 //
Just as, on the pure surface of the Vaiļūrya stone,
There appears the reflection of the body of the highest god;
Similarly, on the pure surface of the mind in the world,
There appears the reflection of the body of the Highest Sage 37). //29 //
The appearance and disappearance of this reflection
Occur due to the condition of one's own mind,
Whether it be pure or impure 38), (respectively),
And, as the feature [of Indra or of the Buddha]
Is seen only as a vision in this world,
So one should not see it as either real or unreal. // 30 ||
39)
(II)
It is said that [the word of the Buddha) has a resemblance with
the celestial drum 40).
(Kārikās 21-25)
Just as, in the heaven of the gods,
Owing to the previous, virtuous experiences,
The divine 41) drum, being apart from efforts,
From a particular place, from forms of mind 42),
And from thought-constructions 43), // 31 //
Alarms all the inattentive gods again and again,
By producing the sounds of 'evanescence ', of suffering ’,
Of “impersonality' and of quiescence'; // 32 ||
Similarly, in this world, the Buddha who is all-pervading
And free from effort and the rest,
Teaches the Doctrine by his voice
35) citra. T. reads cittāni for citrāņi. c. LETT.
36) C. K 7.
37) C. K 4.
38) anāvilata & āvilata, T. rñog-med & rñog-pa, c.T, Y.
39) C. K 5. C. adds 4 verses here with the heading: 'anutpădânirodhas tathāgata
iti’, of which 3 are equivalent to vv. 89–91.
40) Cf. JĀA 241 a (In the oldest version of JĀA, this and the following two simi-
les, namely : (II) devadundubhi, (III) megha & (IV) brahmā are lacking).
41) T. 'dharma-', instead of 'deva- '.
mano-rūpa, T. yid-gzugs. This seems to correspond to śarira’ in v. 34, and
probably means manomayakāya '.
43) C. om. this and the following 2 verses (vv. 31-33).
42)
3
[ 359 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Towards the worthy 44) without exception. // 33 ||
Just as, in the heaven of the gods, the sound
Of the divine drum arises due to their own deeds,
Similarly, in this world, the Doctrine,
Though it is preached by the Buddha, arises [in fact]
Owing to the [previous] own deeds of the people 45);
And just as the celestial] sound, being devoid of
Effort, place, form and thought-construction 46),
Brings forth quiescence;
Similarly, this Doctrine, devoid of those four 47),
Brings forth Nirvāṇa 48). // 34 // 19)
At the time of the trouble 50) of battle, in the city of gods,
There is destruction 51) of the victorious play of the Asuras' army 52)
Which is caused by the sound of drum
And gives fearlessness (among the gods];
Similarly, in this world, in preaching the Highest Path,
[Buddha's] speech destroys
53) the defilements
And pacifies the sufferings in the living beings,
Which is due to various practices like contemplations,
Concentrations in the Immaterial Sphere54) and the rest. // 35 || 55)
(On the superiority of the drum over the other musical instruments) 56).
Now, why has the sound of the drum of Doctrine alone been re-
ferred to and not the cymbals 57) and the other kinds of celestial instru-
48) śānti,
44) bhavya, T. skal-ldan.
45) svakarma-udbhava, c. #W.
46) citta, which corresponds to 'vikalpa' in v. 31.
47) Namely: yatna-sthāna-sarira-citta.
C. E i.
49) C., K 12.
50) klesa. C. om.
51) pranudana, T. sel-ba, c. .
52) T. uses g’yul for samgrāma, as well as for bala.
52) pramathana, T. rab-hjoms, c. klesa-duḥkha-pramathana-samana klesa-
pramathana & duḥkha-samana.
ārūpya[-samāpatti], T. gzugs-med, C. simply É (for FILE ).
55) C. K 13.
66) C. om. the following prose section along with vv. 36-40, and starts again with
v. 41. From the structural viewpoint, this passage (S. p. 102.20–104.12) is no doubt
an interpolation of later days.
57) türya. T. sil-sñon.
64)
[ 360 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
ment? These are likewise produced 58) owing to the previous virtuous
deeds made by the gods and make sound agreeable to the ear of deities.
[To this, we will answer: They are not referred to] because they have
four points of dissimilarity to the Buddha's voice. Then, which are
these [four] ? They are, namely, 1) partiality (prādesikatva); 2) lack of
benefit (ahitatva); 3) unpleasantness (asukhatva) 59); and 4) unconduci-
veness to Deliverance (anairyāṇikatva). [On the other hand] the drum of
Doctrine summons the multitudes of inattentive 60) gods without exception
and sounds at the right time 61). For this reason it is explained as being
not partial ’. Owing to its protecting [gods] from the fear of calamity
caused by the invasion 62) of Asuras and others, and owing to its enjoin-
ing [them) to take heed, its beneficiality' is mentioned. Owing to its
distinguishing bliss from the pleasure caused by evil enjoyment 63) and
to its bringing forth pleasant bliss in taking delight in the Doctrine,
it is said to be blissful'. [And lastly), owing to its delivering the sounds
of' evanescence', 'suffering ', 'non-substantiality' and `impersonality ’,
and to its pacifying all misfortune and perturbation 64), the drum is
explained as being conducive to deliverance'. In short, the circle of
the Buddha's voice is qualified as being similar to the drum of Doctrine
through these four points 65). In regard to distinguishing the circle of the
Buddha's voice, we have one verse.
58) The reading aghatšitā should be corrected into ghaťțitā. For • ... vaśād ghattitā
eva ’, T. ...dban-gis mod kho-nar (because of their being from the power)'. ghattitā
in BHS has the same meaning as Skt. ghatita, i.e. ‘produced' ' effected by' or made.
(BHS Dic. s.v.)
59) For these 4, T. ñi-tshe-ba-õid, phan-pa ma-yin-pa-ũid, bde-ba ma-yin-pa-õid
& nes-par ḥbyin-pa ma-yin-pa-ñid, respectively.
60) T. adds sthāna after apramatta.
61) kāla-anatikramaņatā (lit. not crossing time), T. dus-la mi-ḥdaḥ-bas.
62) paracakra, T. pha-rol-gyi tshogs (paragaña).
63) asatkāma, T. dam-pa ma-yin-paḥi ḥdod.
64) upadrava & upāyāsa, but T. ñe-bar ḥtshe-baḥi phons-pa.
66) Throughout the passage, there is some confusion between illustration and illu-
strated subject. First of all, an analogy was given between devadundubhi and dharmadun-
dubhi, of which the latter is identical with Buddha's voice. Here, the comparison is
made between dundubhi and türya showing the former's superiority to the latter. That
is to say, Buddha's voice is said to be compared with dundubhi alone, but not with tūrya.
But reference is actually made only to dharmadundubhi and not over devadundubhi,
though, if logically speaking, we should expect the comparison between devadundubhi and
divyā-tūrya. Furthermore, in the following passage, v. 37 refers to devadundubhi as
being inferior to Buddha's voice (the reading tūrya is quite a comtradiction and to be
corrected. See below). From this point, criticism can be made on this passage to decide
that it is a later insertion and not perfectly consistent with the original part. Even
[ 361 ]



J. TAKASAKI
66)
Being universal, bringing benefit and bliss,
And being endowed with the threefold miraculous
power
The voice of the Buddha is superior
To [the sound of] the celestial cymbals. // 36 //
Now, of these four points, a brief explanation will be given in the
following four verses.
The sounds of drums in heaven, though be great,
Cannot reach the ears of those abiding on the earth;
In this world, however, the sound of the drum 67) of Buddha
Reaches even those in the lowest sphere of Samsāra. || 37 ||
In heaven, the divine cymbals of a million kinds
Sound only in order to kindle the flame of desire,
But one voice of those full of Compassion
Sounds in order to extinguish the cause 68) of the fire of suffering.
// 38 //
The sounds of cymbals in heaven, though they be pure and
pleasant,
Are the causes for increasing the elation of mind,
The voice of the great
69) Buddhas, however,
Speaks of the concentration 70) of mind in meditation. // 39 //
verses 31-33, which are lacking in C. are doubtful of its originality, because, in v. 32,
the role of devadundubhi is said to be that of making the sound of 4 mudrās, anitya,
etc., which is to be attributed to dharmadundubhi. On the contrary, v. 35 clearly
shows us the role of devadundubhi as being that of encouraging gods to take part on the
battle-field against asura, and this illustration is also given in the basic text, i.e. in JĀA.
As far as this illustration of (II) devadundubhi is concerned, I am inclined to trust
C. arrangement as the original.
66) prātihārya-traya, T. cho-hphrul gsum (Cf. C. Edhe or ET).
Explanation is given in detail after v. 40.
67) The reading " sambuddhatūryasya tu' given by J. is not likely to be accepted.
Ms. B, reads 'sambuddhabhūmer upayāti' and T. gives a word for dundubhi (rra). From
the context, there is no reason for using tūrya to illustrate the Buddha's voice, and ra-
ther it is quite a contradiction. There should be a term synonymous with dundubhi.
From this point, and in the absence of Ms. A, we may accept Ms. B reading by making
a slight change from bhūmer to bherer (bheri dundubhi). Here, tu 'is not essential
for giving contrast between Buddha's voice and that of devadundubhi.
88) T. om. hetu. The cause of suffering means kleśa'.
Instead of mahātman, T. reads kịpātman.
70) arpaņabhāva (the state of fixing upon...), T. gton-bsam-pa (the thought of
sending...).
68
[ 362 ]



The Ratnago tra vibhāga
In short, that which is the cause of bliss,
In heaven, on earth, as well as
In all the other numberless worlds 71),
Is the voice 72) [of the Buddha] which manifests
Pervadingly in the world leaving no residue;
And in respect to those 73) points, thus it is illustrated. || 40 ||
Now, it is indicated that the all-pervadingness [of the Buddha) thro-
ugh the manifestation 74) of body in all the worlds of the ten directions
shows [his] ' manifestation of miracles by the supernatural power ’ (rddhi-
prātihārya) 75). The illumination of the thicket 76) of mental conduct
of living beings, as involved in the mind ), by knowing the variety
of spiritual elements 78), this is called the 'manifestation of miracle
through mind-reading' (ādeśānā-prātihārya) 79). And, with reference to
the Path 80) leading to Deliverance, [the Buddha) preaches and instructs 81)
that Path [to the others] by the example of the utterance of his voice.
This is called “the manifestation of miracle through instruction' (anuśās-
tiprātihārya) 82).
Thus the circle of Buddha's voice is, like space, unimpeded and acts
without interruption, but still this voice cannot be caught everywhere
or in its full extent. This is, however, not at all the fault 83) of the
circle of the Buddha's voice. In order to explain this point, with
reference to the self-fault of those who are not attentive, there is
one śloka 84).
71)
anantāsu lokadhātușu (f. pl.). T. reads divi and kșitau as a genitive and makes
them relate to sukhakāraṇa.
72) praghoșa, but T. dbyans-ñid.
73) For āgamya, T. rab-tu brten-par (pratitya).
74) Đikurbita, T. cho-hphrul (= prātiharya).
76) T. rdsu-hphrul-gyi cho-hphrul, (c. jih tudi s , Mvyut.).
76) gahana, T. zab-mo (gambhira).
77) tat-paryāpanna (tad denotes cetas). For paryāpanna, T. rtogs-pa.
78) cetaḥ-paryāya, T. sems-
es-kyi rnam-grans.
79) T. kun-brjod-pahi cho-hphrul, (c. ấn • Ni Myyut.).
80) pratipad, T. lam.
81) avavāda & anuśāsana, T. ḥdoms-pa & rjes-su bstan-pa.
82) T. rjes-su bstan-paủi cho-hphrul, (C. La Fine T , Mvyut.).
83) aparādha, T. ñes-pa, C. B &.
84) C. starts again with this heading (atat-prahitānām ātmāparādhe). For aſt pra-
hita, T. ma-gtogs-pa (= na prajñāyate), C. T .
[ 363 ]



J. TAKASAKI
(Kārikā 26)
7
Just as a deaf person cannot hear a subtle voice,
Or even to a man of divine ears,
Not all sounds become audible 85)
Similarly, being the object of the most 86) subtle Wisdom,
The Doctrine, of subtle character, becomes audible
Only to one whose mind is free from defilements. || 41 || 87)
(III) It is said that [the mind of the Buddha in its activity] is like a
cloud 88).
(Kārikās 27-30)
Just as, in the rainy season,
The clouds discharge, without any effort,
The multitudes of water on the earth,
Causing abundance of harvest 89); // 42 //
In a similar manner, the Buddha
Discharges the rain of the Highest Doctrine
From the clouds of Compassion, with no searching thought,
For90) [bringing] the crops of virtue among the living beings. // 43 //
Just as the clouds discharge the rain,
Agitated by the wind, upon the earth where
The people behave in the path of virtuous actions 91);
Similarly, the cloud that is the Buddha
Pours the rain of the Highest Doctrine
As the virtues are increased in the world
Owing to the wind of Compassion. // 44 // 92)
Bearing 93) Wisdom and Compassion,
85) The reading should be '...āyāti nikhilam ’, instead of ‘āyānti...' in the text.
86) T, reads parama as an indeclinable (mchog-tu).
87) C. K 14.
88) Cf. JĀA 241 6-c.
89)
sasya, T. lo-tog. C. om. this and the next verse (vv. 42, 43).
sasyeșu (loc.) in the sense of 'in order to bring harvest'. T. reads 'sasya-
hetu' and regards it as an adjective to saddharmasalila.
91) kuśala-karma-patha T. om. karma-,
92) C. K 16. (interchanging the order with the next one).
93) avabhrtka.
C. reads something like pravrika’ E). T." has no equiva-
lent word and, has instead 'chen’ (mahā). Is it a mistake for 'can' (having)? C. con-
90)
[ 364 )



The Ratna gotra vi b h āga
Abiding in the celestial sphere
Without affecting anything, neither perishable nor imperishable 94),
And being the womb of the pure water
Of meditation and mystical formulas 95),
The cloud-like chieftain of sages
Causes the pure crops in various worlds. // 45 // 96)
With reference to the unequality of receptacles in measure 97),
(Kārikā 31)
Cool, sweet, clear, soft, and light 98)
Is the rain descending from the cloud,
But having touched on earth the places filled with salt, etc.,
Becomes of tastes of much variety;
Similar is the rain of the 8-fold Holy Path 99),
Descending from the cloud, the womb abundant with Compassion,
But, owing to the variety of conditions of individuals 100)
It assumes many kinds of taste in the living beings. // 46 //
101)
On the impartial attitude 102)
(Kārikās 32–34)
Those who have faith 103) in the Highest Vehicle,
Those of intermediate nature, and those who resist the Doctrine,
nects “bhaveșu' in various worlds) with “samvit’ (wisdom, T. mkhan) and reads this
line as follows:
SEN WILL (Having known the “ existence ’, produces the Compassion).
94) C. om. kşarâkşarâsanga-.
95) dhāraṇi, T. gzuns, C. #.
96) C. K 15.
97) vimātratā, T. sna-tshogs-ñid (vicitratā), C. ' depending on bhājanaloka, the taste
of rain changes ?.
98) Of these 5, for prasanna, T. dan
dvan-ba; C. says
It It has zle! (water
endowed with 8 qualities), which seems to be merely an • alankāra' in comparison with
the 8-fold Holy Path.
90) äryâstânga. But c.
I.
100) santāna, T. rgyud, C. & U.
101) C. K 17.
102) nirapekșa-pravýtti, T. ltos-pa med-par hjug-pa C. THE X $ U.
103) abhiprasanna, T. dan-ba (being pure), c. te.
[ 365 ]



J. TAKASAKI
105)
These are the three kinds of living beings,
And have similarity with men, peacocks 104) and ghosts , respec-
tively. // 47 / 106)
Towards the end of the summer, being of no cloud,
Men and those birds who cannot fly in the sky 107)
Experience sufferings [from lack of rain);
In the rainy season, however, because of much rainfall,
The ghosts in the ground experience sufferings;
In the case of the living beings in the world,
Those desirous of the Doctrine 108) and those hostile to it,
The non-arising and the arising of the water of Doctrine
From the clouds of Compassion [cause suffering in each turn];
This is the point of similarity. // 48 // 109)
Discharging the gross drop of rain, hail and lightning 110),
The cloud does not care about the subtle living beings,
Nor about those who are on a trip in the mountains 111);
Similarly, the one who holds the waters of Wisdom and Compassion,
[Discharging them] with various means, methods and rules, subtle
or gross,
Does not mind anywhere those who are of Defilements,
Whether [in the burst of] egoistic view or in a dormant state 112).
|| 49 || 113
107)
104) cãtaka, T. rma-bya, C. i 3. (The peacock is said to be delighted when
he sees clouds).
105) preta, T. yi-dags, c. 4. ).
106) C., K 18. C. adds one verse before v. 48, explaining the 3 groups of sattvas
(正定聚眾生習氣不定聚身見邪定聚邪見流生死、
vyomny-aprâcārāḥ, khagā (= cătaka). T. mkhaḥ mi-rgu-baủi bya. C. A
shows the opposit sense.
108) For dharma-ākāňkşin, C.
Poten. C. gives a free rendering for this passage.
109) C., K 20.
110) aśani & vajrâgni, T. rdo-than & rdo-rjeħi me,
c. Telit To To & Æ MUJ
A.
111) saila-deśa-gamika, T. ri-yul son-ba, C. TT (gamika).
112) The reading should be “kleśagatâtmadrsty-anuśayān' instead of kleśagatān
dſsty-anuśayān' (one syllable short). Both T. & C. agree with this reading of 'ātmadrsti';
T. bdag-lta, c. Hi FB L. But the genitive case for ātmadſșți in T. is not correct.
C. reads • klesagata-anuſaya (*) and ätmadęsți.
118) C. K 21.
6
[ 366 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
On (the function of] calming the fire of Suffering,
(Kārikās 35–37)
The succession of birth and death in beginningless time
Is the Samsāra, in whose course 114) there are five Paths,
And in these five Paths, there is no happiness,
Just as excretion has no good smell at all;—
Its suffering is constant and as if produced from
The contact with fire, swords, ice, salt and so forth;
But, to pacify it, the cloud of Compassion
Lets fall 115) the great rain of the Highest Doctrine. || 50 || 116)
Having known that the transmigration [from heaven] 117)
Is the suffering among gods, and, for the human beings,
The searching for the objects of desire 118) is the suffering,
The Wise men never seek for the best glory 119) among gods and
men;
It is because of their Transcendental Intellect,
Because of their following the faith in the Buddha's words,
And consequently], because of their realizing analytically,
This is suffering, this is its cause, and this is its extinction ".
// 51 || 120)
Illness is to be cognized, its cause removed,
Health should be attained 121), and a remedy used 122);
Like that, Suffering, its Cause, Extinction and the Path,
Are to be cognized, removed, touched 123) and observed. || 52 || 124)
114) samsști (course of transmigration), T. hgro-ba, c. vtc . On 'anavarâgra ’,
see Note VIII-242.
115) spjan (V sri), T. rab-tu ḥbebs (pravarşate), C. B.
116) C. K 23 (placing after v. 52).
117) cyuti-duḥkha, T. Ảchi-hpho (om. duḥkha), C. ik
118) paryeşți-duḥkha, T. yons-tshol-sdug-bsial, c. il titoli T 1).
One of the 8 duḥkhas. Cf. Mvyut. 112.
119) aišvaryam uttaram, T. dban-phyug mchog, c. *.
120) C. K 22.
121) For prāpya, C. HK.
122) For sevya (nişevya alike), C. JE (to be practised).
123) sparſitavya, T. reg-par-bya (D's rig-par-bya is to be corrected), C. fit. The
term is here used in the sense of 'to be experienced ’.
124) C. K 22.
[ 367 ]



J. TAKASAKI
(IV) It is said that (the Buddha's apparitional form) is like the great
Brahmā 125),
(Kārikās 38-41)
Just as Brahmā, without moving from his palace,
Manifests his apparition, without any effort,
In the world of gods everywhere;--- // 53 // 126),
Similarly, the Buddha, without moving from the Absolute Body,
Comes to the sight of the worthy 127), without any effort,
With his apparitional form, n all the worlds 128). // 54 //
Just as with Brahmā, though he never moves from his palace,
His manifestation, always pervading the World of Desire,
Is seen by gods and causes them to remove the desire of objects 129);
Similarly with the Lord, though not moving from the Absolute Body,
His sight is seen by the worthy people, in all the worlds,
And causes them to remove all the stains 130) forever. // 55 //
Because of his own original vow,
And of the pure experiences 132) of the multitudes of gods,
Brahmā manifests his apparition without any effort;
Similar is the Buddha, by means of his Apparitional Body. // 56 || 133)
131)
On the invisibility 134) [of the Apparitional form to some people),
(Kärikā 42)
Descent from [the Tuşita), entrance in the womb,
Birth, and the arrival at his father's palace,
Merry life [in the harem) 135), wandering in solitude 136),
125) Cf. JĀA 242 a.
126) C. om. this and the next verse (vv. 53, 54).
127) bhavya, T. skal-Idan, C. & in v. 55). It denotes here, par excellence,
the Mahāyānists.
128) sarvadhātu. sarvaloka (v. 55).
129) vişaya-rati-hara, T. yul-la dgah-ba spor-byed, c. & 1. * T.
130) For mala-hara, C. T *.
131) C. K 26 (interchanges v. 56 & v. 55).
132) anubhava, T. mthu, c
..
133) C. K 25.
134) anābhāsa-gamana, T. mi-snan-ba (om. gamana), C. EL TEL (ābhāsânābhāse).
135) C. inserts
śilpasthāna-kausala
before rati-krida.
On these vastus, see S.
p. 87–88 (vv. II, 54-56).
136) C. divides “ āranyapravicarana ' into it (naiskramya) & TT TT (pra-
vicaraña or duḥkhacariyā), but T. dben-par spyod.
[ 368 )



The Ratna gotra vibhāg a
The victory over the Evil One 137),
The attainment of the Supreme Enlightenment,
And the teaching of the Path leading to the city of Peace 138)
The Buddha, though demonstrating such events,
Does not come to the eye-sight of those who are unhappy 139).
// 57 || 140)
(V) It is said that the Buddha [in his Wisdom) is like the sun 141).
(Kārikā 43)
When the sun becomes shining 142), at one and the same time
The lotus flowers awake and the Kumuda 143) folds its flowers;
But the sun has no discrimination in regard to the water-born flowers
Similar is the sun of the Saint [in his acts] in the world
In regard to the awakening of virtues and closing of defects 144).
// 58 // 145)
(On the two kinds of people compared to the two kinds of waterborn
flowers) 146).
There are two kinds among the living beings: one is the non-converts
and the other is the converts. Of them, with reference to the converts,
there are the simile of the sun-lotus and the simile of the receptacle of pure
water.
Just as the sun, without thought-construction,
With his own rays, simultaneously everywhere 147),
Lets the lotus flowers come to blossom,
現就外道學
137) C. inserts
(study under the guidance of tirthas) before
mārapramathana.
138) C. inserts cakravartin before this. For praśamapura,
c. T. shi-baḥi
gron-khyer.
139) For adhanya, T. skal-med (abhavya), but c. TAU.
140) C. K 27.
141) Cf. JĀA 242 b.
142) tapat (< V tap), T. gdun-ba (tapati), C.A.
143) A kind of lotus or water-lily, which is said to open its flower at night.
& doșa, C. Hij & Hi, respectively.
145) C. K 28.
146) C. om. hereafter up to the prose commentary before v. 63, and this passage
seems to be an interpolation.
147) eka-muktābhir, T. cig-car spros-pa-yis (ekatra kālasamaye sakrt). 'muktā'
a flash delivered from the sun'.
144) For guņa
means
[ 369 ]



J. TAKASAKI
And lets the other come to ripeness; // 59 ||
Similarly, the sun that is the Buddha,
With the rays of the Highest Doctrine,
Appears with no thought-construction,
Upon the converts resembling lotus flowers. // 60 //
With the body of the Absolute and that of Apparition,
Arising in the sky of the Seat of Enlightenment 148)
The sun 149) of Omniscience pervades the world
With the rays of the Transcendental Wisdom; // 61 ||
From which, everywhere in the [mind of] converts
Who are like receptacles 150) of pure water,
Appear simultaneously innumerable reflections
Of that sun which is the Lord. // 62 ||
Thus the Buddhas, though they are non-discriminative, manifest them-
selves with visible forms and by teaching among the three categories of
living beings according to order. With reference to this order, there
is a simile of mountains 151).
154)
(Kārikās 44-45)
Although the sun of the Buddha pervades 152)
Always and everywhere the sky-like Universe 153),
He casts his rays
upon
the converts
Who are like mountains, acco ording to their merit 155). // 63 //
Just as, in this world, the sun 156),
Spreading out his thousands of glorious rays,
Rising and illuminating the whole world,
Shines 157) upon the mountains, high, middle, and low, gradually;
148) bodhi-manda, T. byan-chub-sñin-po. (maņda = sāra).
149) dinakȚt.
150) āśaya, T. snod (= bhājana).
151) T. sūryôpamatā, instead of' sailôpamatā’. C. starts with this heading, saying:
krame ślokaḥ '.
162) The readingsvisſte ' & 'buddhasūrye’ are to be corrected into 'visſto’ &
buddhasūryo ’, respectively. Also " vineyâdri’ should be changed into ' vineyâdrau’
(loc.) and be separated from ótannipāto'. So T., C. om. this verse.
153) dharmadhātu, T. chos-dbyins.
154) tan-nipāta. (sūryasya nipāta). For nipāta, T. Ảbab.
155) yathāʻrhataḥ, T. ji-ltar ħos-par.
156) saptasapti.
157) pratapati. For this, T. ḥbab (prapatati), but c. (as in the text).
[ 370 ]



The Rat na gotravibhāga
Similar is the sun of the Buddha which shines
Upon the groups of living beings, according to their order. //64 // 158)
On the superiority of the Buddha's] light to that of the sun),-
(Kārikās 46-47)
Of the sun 159), there does not exist the all-pervadingness 160)
In all kinds of lands and in the whole sky,
Nor does he show all things knowable [by removing]
The thicket 161) of the darkness of ignorance;
But those who are of the nature of Compassion,
Illuminate the world with spreading bands 162) of rays,
Produced from each hair 163) and filled with various colours,
And manifest all things knowable 164). || 65 ||
When the Buddhas enter the city,
Those who are of no eyes perceive the object 166),
And, having seen it, cognize how to remove the net of harm 167)
And [likewise) even those blinded by ignorance,
Who have fallen into the sea 168) of the Phenomenal World,
And are obscured by the darkness of false views,
Have their intellect illumined by the light of the sun of the Buddha,
And come to perceive the Truth 169) unseen before. || 66 ||
165)
170)
158) C. K 29.
159) bhānu.
160) parispharaṇatā, T. hphro, c. ii.
161) gahana, T. bkab (< ḥgebs, to cover, spread), C. has no equivalent word and
has instead · T Talk (not break).
162) visara, T. tshogs, c.
EM (abhrajāla).
163) T. & C. om.
ekaikaroma-udbhavair'.
164) For jñeyârtha, c. Ji ko treba biti.
165) C. K 31. C. adds one verse before this, which runs as follows:
色智身二法大悲身如空遍照諸世間,故佛不同日
(The one who is of the nature of compassion,
Manifesting the two bodies, apparitional and of Wisdom,
Pervades, like space, the whole world;
Therefore, the Buddha is not the same as the sun). (C. K 30)
166) For artha, C. * FU (the great benefit).
167) anarthajála-vigama, C. X. For jāla, T. tshogs, c. (several).
168) arnava (BHS) (Pali annada ?), T. mtsho, C. om.
169) pada, T.
gnas,
c. De
170) C. K 32.
[ 371 )
25



J. TAKASAKI
(VI) It is said that [the Buddha's mind in its act] has a resemblance
to the wish-fulfilling gem 171).
(Kārikās 48–50)
173)
Just as the wish-fulfilling gem,
Though itself is of no thought-construction,
Fulfills all desires of those
Living in the same region 172), separately; // 67 //
Similarly, those who are of different inclinations,
Having approached 174) the wish-fulfilling gem of the Buddha,
Come to hear the Truth in its various aspects.
But the Buddha has no discrimination regarding them. || 68 || 175)
Just as the precious jewel, having no thought-construction 176),
Produces the desired treasure, without effort, for others;
Similarly, the Lord always benefits others, without effort,
According to their merit, as long as the world exists. // 69 //
It is said that the Buddhas are 177) difficult to obtain.
(Kärikā 51)
Here, in this world, it is quite rare
To obtain the pure gem, even though the people so much
Long for it in the depth of the ocean or under the ground 178);
Similarly, the sight of Buddha should be known as
Not easily achieved in this luckless 179) world
By those whose mind is afflicted by various passions. || 70 ||
171) Cf. JĀA 243 a.
172) yugapad-gocara-sthāna, T. cig-car-tu spyod-yul gnas-pa, C. -M.
173) C. K 33.
174) sametya, T. brten-nas, c. Hi ! (living together) and adds Alus
(on the mind of Compassion).
175) C. K. 34.
176) T. om, avikalpam, and for maņiratna, cintāmaņiratna; C. om, the whole verse
as well as the next one along with its heading.
177) bhāva, T. hbyun-ba (state of being). T. reads as durlabhaprāptas tathā-
gatabhāvah'.
178) pātāla-stha. T. sa-ḥog gnas.
178) durbhaga, T. skal-ran.
( 372 )



The Ratnagotravibhāga
(VII) It is said that [the Buddha in his voice] is like an echo 180).
(Kārikās 52-53)
Just as the sound of an echo
Arising from the voice 181) of others
Is of no discrimination and of no effort 182)
And has no foundation, either inside or outside; || 71 || 183)
In a similar way, the voice of the Buddha
Arising through the voice of others
Is of no discrimination and of no effort,
And has no foundation, either inside or outside. || 72 ||
184)
(VIII) It is said that [the Buddha's body is] like space 185).
(Kārikās 54–55)
Being immaterial 186) and invisible,
Without support 187) and without foundation,
Surpassing the way of eye-sight,
Formless and incapable of being shown, // 73 // 188)
Though being so, the sky is seen as low and high 189)
But, in reality, it is not like that;
Similarly, all kinds of forms are seen in the Buddha,
But, in reality, the Buddha is not like that. || 74 || 190).
(IX) It is said that [the Buddha as the foundation of all activities]
is like the earth 191).
(Kārikās 56-57)
Just as all plants 192)
180) Cf. JĀA 243 b.
181) vijñapti, T. rnam-rig. C. om. (but in the next verse, "").
182) For anābhoga, T. bzo-med.
183) C. K 35.
184) C., K. 36.
185) Cf. JĀA 243 c (after the simile of prthivi. JĀA puts this simile at the end).
186) nişkimcana, T. cun-zad-med, C. HE .
187) nirālamba, T. dmigs-pa med, C. HET.
188) C. K 37.
180) nimnônnata, T. mtho dan dmaḥ (high and low), C. F (as T.).
190) C. K 38.
191) Cf. JĀA 243 c.
102) mahiruha (= mahiruh), T. sa-las skye-ba, c. 8*.
[ 373 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Taking resort to the earth
Which has no searching thought,
Come to grow, thrive 193) and expand; // 75 || 194)
Similarly, the roots of virtues in the world,
Taking resort to the ground of the Buddha
Who has no searching thought,
Proceed completely towards growth. || 76 || 195)
§ 3. Summarized Meaning of the Illustrations given by the Commen-
tator.
Summarized meaning of these examples is as follows:
The performance of actions without effort
Connot be seen by us 196). Therefore,
The ninefold examples have been related
In order to clear the doubts of the converts. || 77 ||
Its purpose [of teaching] is explained
By the very name of that Scripture,
Where these nine illustrations
Are demonstrated in detail. // 78 //
Adorned with 197) this light of the great wisdom
Which is the result of study,
The wise men enter rapidly
In the whole region of the Buddha. // 79 //
For this reason 198), there are nine examples
Illustrated by the reflection of Indra
On the surface of Vaidūrya stone, and the rest.
In this sense 199), you should know their summarized meaning;-
// 80//
om.
193) vairūdhi, T. brtan-pa (become firm), C. om., and for vaipulya, ji gat (in the
next verse however, c. 1, for vặddhim upayānti).
194) C. K 39.
195) C. K 40.
196) T. connects “kaścid' with 'kriyām'. C. reads as “kriyām rte' and
prayatnam.
197) The reading “ālokady-alankſtāḥ' had better be changed into alokād alan-
kytāḥ’, according to T. which reads ... ḥdis brgyan-pa' (etena alańkſtāḥ). •ādi' gives
no sense. This verse stands for the title of the sūtra, namely the Sarvabuddhavișayâva-
tāra-jñānâlokalarkārasūtra.
198) ity artham, T. de-don (tad-artham), C. om.
199) tasmin, T. deņi (tasya), C. om.
[ 374 ]



The Rat na g otra vibhā g a
[Namely]: appearance, teaching 200), pervasion,
Transformation 201), and emanation of Wisdom,
Secrecy in acts by mind, speech and body,
And acquisition of those whose nature is of Compassion 202). // 81 /
[The Buddha's] mind 203), being of no thought-construction,
Is such in which all the movements of effort are pacified,
As given in the examples, beginning with the arising
Of the reflection of Indra on the pure Vaidūrya stone. // 82 //
The proposition ’ is here the pacification of effort,
The “logical reason
is the non-discriminativeness of mind,
And, in order to establish the subject in discussion '204)
There are given examples ', the form of Indra, etc. // 83 //
And here the subject in discussion’ is that
These nine, ' appearance and the rest,
Are manifested without any effort
And without birth or death 205) of the Preceptor. || 84 ||
§ 4.
Summary of examples given in Kārikās 206).
With reference to this meaning (or subject), we have other four
ślokas, being the summary of all the examples.
(Kārikās 58-61)
The one who acts for the sake of others,
Without effort, as long as the world exists,
200) darśanādeśanā. A doubtful reading as J suggested. Shall we accept darsanā'
as an irregular form for darśana? If so both terms are to be written separately.
201) vikști, T. sprul. C. De gives no suitable sense.
202) karuņā-ātmānām prāptih, T. thugs-rjeủi bdag-ñid thob-pa-ñid, c. *
1. I incline to interpret that this “karuņâtmānām ', which as a genitive case is
connected to all these 9. Karuņā-ātmā, means the Buddha or the Bodhisattva. These 9
meanings are given to each of the 9 illustrations, respectively. Namely: 1) ‘darśana'
(darsanā ?) for śakrapratibhāsa; 2) “deśanā’ for devadundubhi; 3) ‘vyāpi’ for megha;
4) ‘ vikſti’ for Brahmā; 5) “jñāna-niḥsști’ for sūrya; 6) “mano-guhyaka ’ for cintāmaņi;
7) vāg-guhyaka' for pratiśrutika; 8) “kāya-guhyaka’ for ākāśa; & 9).prāpti' for
bhūmi.
203) dhi (text, in pl.), T. thugs.
204) prakṣtârtha, T. ran-bshin-don (prakſtyartha), C. as vicitra-artha. In the
next verse, c. 1o... (to establish the meaning) (of is used in the verse for
• susiddha ').
205) antardhi, T. ḥchi. But C. E E Til (janmântarddhim rte).
206) C. om. this passage up to v. 87, but mentions v. 88 at the end of the illustra-
tion of prthivi. As for the treatment of this group of verses, see my Introduction, II, § 2.
[ 375 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Like Indra, like the divine drum, like clouds,
Like Brahmā, like the sun, like the wish-fulfilling gem,
Like an echo, like the sky and like the earth,
That is [the Buddha] who knows a means [of precept] 207).
// 85 //
The excellent teacher 208) has an appearance
Like the reflection of the chief of gods on the jewel,
His voice is like the [sound of] the divine drum,
Having the great sphere of the clouds of Wisdom and Mercy,
He pervades an unlimited number of living beings,
Up to the highest limit of existence 209). // 86 //
Like Brahmā, the Buddha
Shows himself variously with the apparitional forms,
Without moving from the immaculate place 210);
Like the sun, he shines always, spreading the light of Wisdom;
And his mind [acts] like the wish-fulfilling gem. // 87 //
Like an echo is the Buddha's voice,
Not being expressed by letters 211);
Like space is his body,
Being all-pervading, formless and eternal;
And like the earth is the State of Buddha 212) in this world,
Being the seat 213) of all virtues, the remedy 214) of the whole world.
// 88 // 215)
207) yogavid, (as an epithet of the Buddha), T. rnal-ḥbyor-rig.
208) sudaisika, T. legs-par ķdoms-mdsad. The Buddha is sudaiśika. T. takes de-
vadundubhi as relating to this word, and om. vibho rutam'.
209) ā bhavāgrataḥ, T. srid-rtseħi bar-du. The translation is according to T.
If we take
agra’ as “beginning ’, the meaning is since the very beginning of
the world.
210) anāsravāt padād, which denotes anāsravadhātu', i.e. dharmakāya.
211) anakşara-ukta, T. yi-ge-min (om. ukta), c. *FE which gives
proper sense.
212) buddhabhūmi, T. sans-rgyas-sa, C. 7 D.
213) īspada, T. gshir gyur-pa, C. A...
214) śukladharma-auşadhi, T. dkar-poủi chos-kyi sman, C. ·切諸妙藥
and t ** (as the earth is aspada of auşadhi, the Buddha's bhūmi is
āspada of śukladharma, being aușadhi), which shows the proper interpretation of the
simile.
215) C. K 41.
[ 376 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
§ 5. Non-origination and Non-extinction of the Buddhahood 216).
Why, then, in this exposition of examples, is the Buddha, who is
always of neither origination nor extinction, explained to be seen with
appearance and disappearance and as having actions, to work among all
living beings, without effort and without interruption ? [To answer this
question, there are three verses].
Like the Vaidurya stone, the purity in the mind
Is the cause of the Buddha's appearance,
And this purity of mind is intensified
By the irresistible 217) faculty of faith. || 89 || 2
Owing to the appearance and disappearance of purity,
The forms of the Buddha appear and disappear;
But, in his Body of the Absolute 219) that is like Indra,
The Lord does never appear nor disappear. // 90 // 2
Thus, his actions, apparition and the rest,
Are manifested without any effort,
From the Absolute Body, which never arises nor disappears,
As long as the world exists 221), // 91 // 222)
218)
220)
§ 6. The Point of Dissimilarity 223).
This is the summarized meaning of similes
And this very order is told in order to show
That the dissimilarity of the former example
216) This passage is again doubtful with regard to its position in the text.
C. inserts the following 3 verses, along with one additional verse and with the heading
anutpādânirodhas tathāgata iti' at the end of the 1st illustration, “sakrapratibhāsavat'
(after v. 28). As for the treatment of this passage, see my Introduction, II, § 2. The verse
added in C before v. 89 is as follows: H L ESTE FIN B M F M FILE PJ
đk k l m 2k .
217) asamhārya, T. mi-zlogs-pa, C. T.
218) C., K 9.
219) G. om. dharmakāya.
220) C., K 10.
221) ă bhavasthiteh, C.
222) C., K 11.
223) So-called "vyatirekâlarkāra (O). C. puts v. 92 immediately after v. 84.
[ 377 ]



J. TAKASAKI
[With the Buddha) is removed by the latter one 224). || 92 ||
Buddhahood is like the reflection [of Indra],
But the reflection, being of no voice, is not like that;
[Being endowed with voice, the Buddha) is like
The divine drum, which however does not match him,
Since it is not everywhere making benefits. || 93 ||
[Being beneficial everywhere), he is like a big cloud,
Which however, having no seed of virtue 225), is not like him;
[Being the root of virtue] 226), he is like great Brahmā,
But, being unable to ripen perfectly, Brahmā is not like him. // 94/
[As the cause of perfect maturity], he is like the sun,
But the sun cannot remove darkness fully, so it is not like him,
[As the darkness-breaker), he is like the wish-fulfilling gem,
Which, however, is not as difficult to get as he is. || 95 ||
The Buddha has a resemblance to an echo 227),
Which however, being a product of causes, is not like him,
[Being of no c
cause]
228) he has a resemblance to space,
Which, not being the basis of virtues, is not like him. // 96 //
The Buddha resembles the region of the earth,
Since he is the ground and foundation 229)
For the achievement of all the virtues
Of living beings, mundane and supermundane 230). // 97 //
9
3
224) “... kramaḥ punaḥ / pūrvakasyöttareņôkto vaidharmyaparihārataḥ | punaḥ,
kramo uktaḥ, pūrvakasya vaidharmyasya uttareņa pariḥārataḥ'. T. rim-pa yan sňa-ma
phyi-mas chos-mi-mthun spans-paḥi sgo-nas brjod-pa yin. C. I AM TE
WHAT W X I.
225) sārthabīja, T. don-med-paḥi sa-bon spon min (for “ na sārtha ... ?), c. # F
FIT F. It shows the sense that “megha’ cannot remove' anarthabija ’, in
another word, ' megha’ cannot distinguish either 'sārtha' or anartha'. After all J's
reading seems correct.
226) C. ‘being acala like Brahmā’
227) Here we cannot get the proper similarity of echo to the Buddha by means of
the same operation as it is used in former examples. Echo cannot be 'durlabdha'!
Furthermore, “durlabdhatva’ of cintāmaņi was mentioned previously (v. 70) as a point
of similarity to the Buddha.
228) Cf. tathāgatavyoma nimittavarjitam' (II, v. 20).
220) C. reads T ,
being a dissimilation of prthivi' with the Buddha.
But it is not the case.
230) In this series of illustrations, the author seems to have had an opinion that the
earth is the foundation of everything, and consequently, is the nearest simile for the
Buddha. It is, however, quite against the other cases in this text, where ‘ākāśa' is
[ 378 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāg a
а.
By resorting to 231) the Buddha's Enlightenment,
There arises the supermundane Path, and hence,
There emerges the Path of virtuous actions,
Consisting of meditation, the immeasurable mind
And the absorption in the Immaterial Sphere 232). // 98 //
Finished is the fourth chapter entiled “the Acts of the Buddha',
in the ANALYSIS OF THE GERM OF THE JEWELS, a Treatise
on the Ultimate Doctrine of the Great Vehicle with the commentary
[named] “the Summary of Meaning of the ślokas ’. ||
used as the most suitable simile for the Buddha. And as this very order was arranged
in the Udāharaṇa-kārikās against the order given in JĀA (which puts the simile of ‘ākāśa'
at the last), we may be allowed to say that those Udāharaṇa-kārikās in Chap. IV were
not composed by the same author as that of the Basic verses in Chapter I.
231) ágamya, T. brten-nas, C. HE (= āśritya).
232) dhyāna, apramāņa, ārūpya, respectively. * dhyāna' stands for the 4 kinds of
dhyāna (Cf. Mvyut. 67), «apramāņa’ stands for those, maitri, karuņā muditā & upeksa
(Cf. Mvyut. 69), and "ārūpya’, for the sampatti in 4 kinds of ārūpyadhātu (Cf. Mvyut. 162).
C. adds one verse more after v. 98, saying:
諸如來自然常住諸世間有如是諸業一時非前後
VE RP e truly (Buddhas perform these actions, without effort, abiding always in
(various] worlds, at one and the same time).
[ 379 ]



CHAPTER V.
THE MERITS OF FAITH
(ANUSAMSA)
XVIII. THE MERITS OF HAVING FAITH IN THE DOCTRINE
OF THE ESSENCE OF BUDDHAHOOD
§ 1. The Superiority of Faith over Other Virtues in Regard to Their Merits.
Hereafter, with reference to the advantage of faith 1) possessed by
those who are believing in these [4] subjects 2) which have been duly
described above, we have six ślokas.
(Kārikās 1-6)
The Essence of Buddhahood, the Enlightenment of the Buddha,
The Buddha's Properties, and the Buddha's Acts,
They are inconceivable even to those of the pure mind 3),
Being the exclusive sphere of the Leaders 4). //1//
But the wise one, whose intellect 5) accepts the faith
In this exclusive sphere of the Buddha,
Becomes a receptacle of the whole collection of properties,
And, being possessed of the desire [to obtain]
The inconceivable properties [of the Buddha],
6)
ca-
1) adhimukty-anu śamsa, T. mos-paủi phan-yon, C. eth phone.
a) Namely: Samalā tathatā (or tathāgatagarbha) in Chap. I, Nirmalā tathatā in
Chap. II, Buddhaguņāḥ, in Chap. III, and Buddhakriya in Chap. IV. T. & C. add.
turşu' before 'sthāneşu'.
3) śuddhasattva, T. dag-paḥi sems, C. [.
1) nāyaka, T. hdren-pa, C. . The verse corresponds to v. 23 of Chap. I.
5) buddhi. But T. as if 'buddha'. C. has no equivalent word.
6) For guņâbhilāşayogāt, T. reads -guņâbhilāşāt.
[ 30 ]



The Rat na gotra vibhāga
He surpasses the abundance ?) of merits of all living beings. // 2 //
Suppose there were one who, being anxious to obtain the Enligh-
tenment,
Would offer golden lands, constructed 8) by jewels
As innumerable as the sands in the Buddha's lands,
To the Lord of Doctrine, always, day after day;
Another if he hear but one word of this teaching 9),
After hearing of it, would have faith in this Doctrine;
The latter would reap merits far more than the merits 10) of an
offering. // 3 //
Suppose a wise man, being desirous of the Highest Enlightenment,
Would keep pure moral conduct by his body, speech and mind,
Without effort, in course of innumerable aeons;
Another, if he hear but one word of this teaching,
After hearing of it, would have faith in this Doctrine;
The latter would reap merits far more than the merits of morality.
// 4 //
Suppose one would give himself up to the mystic absorption,
Which suppresses the fire of defilements in the 3 worlds 11),
And, having been transferred 12) to the abode of Brahman in
heaven,
Would be irreversible 13) from the means of Enlightenment;
Another, if he hear but one word of this teaching,
After hearing of it, would have faith in this Doctrine;
The latter would reap merits far more than even the merits of the
mystic absorption. || 5 ||
Charity brings people only to [worldly] enjoyment
Morality leads people to the blissful world 15),
And meditation is conducive to the removal of Defilements,
But the Transcendental Intellect can remove
14),
prasava, T. om., C. not clear.
8) samskſta, T. spros-pa, C. om.
9) itaḥ padam. itas ’, from this religion. Cf. ito-bāhyas (S. p. 28. 6).
10)
ритуа.
11) tribhuvana, T. srid-pa gsum, c. = F.
12) For pārami-gata, c. B FTTT.
13) For acyuta, C. reads " have no ... (FE); T. adds ‘bhāvanā’ (bsgoms).
14) For bhoga, c. 1 (to get richness as merits).
15) svarga, T. mtho-ris, c. +
[ 381 )



J. TAKASAKI
All [the obscurations of] defilements and ignorance.
Therefore, Intellect is the supreme one [of all virtues]
And its very source is the study of this Doctrine 16). // 6 ||
The summarized meaning of these ślokas should be known by the fol-
lowing 9 verses.
The basis [of Buddhahood] 17), its transformation 18),
Its properties and the performance of welfare 19),
In these four aspects of the sphere of Buddha's Wisdom,
Which have been explained above, 11 7://
The wise one has become full of faith
With regard to its existence, power and virtue 20),
Therefore, he quickly attains the potentiality 21)
Of acquiring the state 22) of the Tathāgata. 11 8 ||
Indeed, as he is full of devotion and faith
That there exists' this inconceivable sphere,
gnas,
20)
16) C. adds 3 padas explaining: “Therefore, śruti is the supreme. Needless to say,
about the merit of having faith after hearing of the doctrine H X
何況聞法已得能生信 L»)”. This arrangement of the pāramitās
(which are construed with the 6 pāramitās by the commentator) seems to show the pre-
vious stage of the 'pāramitā' doctrine. Of these 4, the first 3 are called “punyakriyā-
vastu' (Cf. Mvyut, 93) and represent “punya-sambhāra '.
17) āśraya, T.
C.
: * It denotes dhātu' or 'tathāgatagarbha’.
18) This is the only case where the term 'parāvrtti’ is used instead of parivítti '.
(T. gyur-pa, C. [1] FIT . Probably the original reading was '-parivſttau’ as J.
suggested. But there is no proof for this suggestion.
19) artha-sūdhana, c. ), T. don-grub. This is for “buddhakriyā”.
astitva, śaktatva & guṇavattva; T. yod[-ñid], nus-ñid, yon-tan-ldan-pa; C. #j,
1, III a , resp. BGś makes use of these 3 points in various passages:
794 b, 795 c-796 a (applied to the 3 meanings of tathāgatagarbha); 799 c (adding' acintyatva ',
counts 4 points of faith); 811 b (as the first 3 of the 5 meanings of garbha explained through
9 illustrations); 812 c-813 a (as the 3 fundamental points of discussion of the work).
This theory of ' 3 points of faith ’ is often found in the works of Vijñānavāda with
the order of 'astivta-guņavattva-saktatva', but the reference is to “karma-phala’, “ ārya-
satya ', and 'triratna’, and not to 'gotra'. (e. g. VMT Bhāsya, p. 26, 11. 24–30; Hsüang-
chuang's tr, of MSbh, Taisho 31, p. 350 b, etc.). Its application to gotra seems to
belong only to the Ratna, and BGS. (Cf. MSbh (P), 1946–200 c, where it is applied
to 'gotra-astitva', probably under the influence of the Ratna.).
21) bhavyatā, T. skal-ldan (om. -tă) C. SHE E B (bhavyatā in the sense of excel-
lence and is regarded as an apposition to 'tathāgata-padâpti').
2) pada, T. go-hphar, c. PT.
[ 382 )



The Rat na gotra vibhāg a
7
>
6
That it can' be realized by one like him 23)
And this sphere, ' endowed with such virtues ’, has been attained,
// 91
So in him the mind intent. on Enlightenment 24)
Being a receptacle of virtues like zeal, energy,
Memory, contemplation, Transcendental Intellect, etc.,
Comes to exist always. // 10 //
As this mind constantly exists 25),
The son of the Buddha becomes irreversible,
And he reaches the accomplishment and the perfect purity 26),
With regard to the Highest of Merits 27). || 11 ||
The (Highest of] Merits' means the [first] 5 Highest virtues,
Its accomplishment is owing to his being non-discriminative
With regard to the three aspects [of activity] 28),
And “the perfect purity' is caused by his removal of the opponents.
|| 12 ||
Charity is the merit consisting of granting gift,
Morality is the merit consisting of moral conduct,
And both Patience and Meditation, is that of practice,
But Exertion is the merit common to all. // 13 //
Discrimination regarding the 3 aspects of activity,
That is the Obscuration of Ignorance;
The opponents 29) [to the 5 Highest Virtues], jealousy, etc.,
They are the Obscurations of Defilements. || 14 ||
But, without the Highest Intellect,
The other 5 cannot be the cause of their removal;
Therefore, the Highest Intellect is the supreme one of all,
And, as the source of it 30) is the study [of this Doctrine],
It is this study that is the most important. // 15 //
23) lit. like me. (mādęsa).
24) bodhicitta, T. byan-chub-sems, C. SIE E
25) According to T. & C., the reading “ taccittapratyupasthānād' is to be corrected
into "tannityapratyupasthānād'.
26) pūri & parisuddhi. Both are to be taken as connecting with punyapāramitā ’.
For “ pūri”, T. rdsogs, c. # # # WE JE E.
punya-pāramitā, which corresponds to punya-sambhāra '.
For “punya',
T. bsod-nams, C
c. IJ me
28) It is explained in v. 14 as trimandala-parisuddhi,. 3 are 'giver', 'receiver'
and gift'.
29) For vipakşa, T. reads vikalpa. But it is not the case (see v. 12) C. ET VA Æ.
30) The reading “câsya' is to be corrected into “câsyā' (being a pronoum for prajñā).
27)
[ 383 ]



J. TAKASAKI
§ 2. Authority, Motive, and Characteristics of This Text Being the Cor.
rect Doctrine.
[Hereafter we have ślokas mentioning on which basis, for what mo-
tive, and how this doctrine has been explained and what characteristics
it has. First of all, with reference to the basis and motive, there is one
śloka 31)].
(Kārikā 7)
Thus, on the basis of the authoritative Scripture and of Logic 32)
This treatise is expounded by me in order to attain
Perfect purification for myself, exclusively;
At the same time, however, this is in order to assist 33)
Those intelligent people who are endowed with faith
And accomplishment of virtues 34). // 16 //
[Next we have one śloka stating how this treatise is explained] 35).
(Kārikā 8)
36)
Just as, with the aid of a lamp, of lightning,
Of a precious stone, of the moon and the sun
Those possessed of vision can perceive objects;
Similarly, I have expounded this treatise
31) The headings which are given in brackets are missing in S. Except for this and
the last one, i.e. the heading for v. 24, T. retains all the headings, and C., has all
of them, including those two. This one is according to C. The topic of each śloka is,
however, given in the commentary verse.
Emendation: (ataḥ, param yataś ca yannimittam ca yathā ca yadudāḥrtam tadārab-
hya ślokāḥ /) tatra yamāśraye yannimittam côdāhſtam tadārabhya ślokaḥ 1.
The following passage containing 10 Kārikās (vv. 16–25) and 3 commentary verses
(vv. 26–28) along with heading thereon is inserted with exact order and wording in
Paramārtha's tr. of MSbh (Taisho 31, p. 270 a-b).
32) āptâgama & yukti, T. yid-ches-lun & rigs-pa. But C. seems to divide the first
one into 'āpta' & 'āgama' and says
諸如來教,修多羅相應( (* āpta '
in the sense of 'āptavacana ?).
33) anugraha, T. rje-su-gzun, C. .
34) kušalôpasampadā. C. om. “kušalasampad'.
35) katham (or yathā) udāhſtam tadārabhya ślokaḥ /, according to T. C. ‘kim artham
iti...'.
86) bhāskara.
[ 384 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
37)
Relying upon the Lord who is the sun
Manifesting 38) the Doctrine of great welfare. // 17 //
[Then we have one śloka stating the characteristics of the correct
doctrine) 39)
(Kārikā 9)
Whatever the word 40) that is connected with the scriptural
texts 41)
It pursues the [ultimate] aim [of living beings] 42),
Is conducive to removing the Defilements in the 3 Worlds,
And can demonstrate the advantage of Quiescence,
Such a word is that of the Great Sage 43)
And all others are of perverse character 44). || 18 ||
[Next we have one śloka stating by what means this treatise is expla-
ined] 45).
(Kārikā 10)
Whatever is spoken by those whose mind is not distracted
And who refer to 46) the Lord as the only Preceptor,
40)
37) prabhākara. But T. ḥod-mdsad-pa (illuminating). c. * HA (illumination,
light) is for either ‘prabhākara’ or “pratibhā'.
38) pratibhā, T. spobs (0. flash of idea). For v. 17c d, C. reads:
依佛法光明聖眼者能見
聖眼者能見以法有是利
以法有是利故我說此法
(Similarly, by the light of the Buddha's doctrine, those possessed of vision of intelli-
gence come to see. As the doctrine has such a benefit, I have expounded this teaching).
39) Acc. to C. (A BETO). But T. “yadudāhſtam tadārabhya ślokaḥ’. C. gives
clearer sense though the original S. was probably as T.
vacas, T. gsun, c. .
41) dharmapada, T. chos (om. pada), C. Æ nj.
42) arthavat, T. don-ldan, C., and separates it from dharmapada (tj.
i ml).
48) ārşa, T. dran-sror-gsun, c. OBRE ). This term ārşa is, like ăptâ-
gama, used originally for the Vedas.
41) viparita, T. bzlog-pa, c. 4. This verse is quoted in the Bodhicaryâ-
vatāra-pañjikā (Bibl. Ind. edition, p. 432).
45) Acc. to T., yenôdāhrtam tadārabhya ślokaḥ; C. puts here the heading which is to
be put before v. 19. This topic is called 'nișyandaphala' in the commentary.
46) uddiśat, T. dban-byas (uddiśya or adhikſtya). C. reading of this verse is rather
[ 385 ]



J. TAKASAKI
And is favourable to the Path of the [2] Accumulations which lead
to Emancipation,
That is also to be accepted with respect
As if it were taught by the Great Sage. || 19 //
47)
§ 3. The Means of Preserving oneself within the Doctrine.
[Here we have two ślokas referring to the means of preserving one-
self from becoming deprived (of this Doctrine) 48)]
(Kārikās 11--12)
Indeed in this world there is no one wiser than the Buddha,
No other who is omniscient and knows completely
The highest Truth according to the right method;
Therefore, the Scripture should not be interpolated 49),
Which is discoursed 50) by the Sage himself,
Otherwise, it will do harm 51) to the Highest Doctrine
Because of destroying 52) the teaching 53) of the Buddha. // 20 //
difficult to identify with S. It is as follows:
雖說法句義 斷三界煩惱無明覆慧眼 食等諸垢纏
又於佛法中取少分說者世典善言說彼三尚可受
何況諸如來 遠離煩惱苦無漏真智人所說修多羅
(The ſword] of one who, although he preaches the dharmapadârtha [in order to] re-
move the klešas in the tridhātu, still has vision whose intelligence is covered by avidyā,
and himself is hindered by the stains, rāga, etc., or [the word spoken by] one who accepts
a little part of the Buddha's doctrine, or the beneficial words spoken in the worldly
books, even those words could be accepted [as the correct teaching]. Needless to say,
the doctrine in the sūtra which is spoken by the Buddhas who have removed the suffer-
ing caused by klešas and are of the immaculate Wisdom is to be accepted.
For v. 19 b (śāstāram ekam jinam uddiśadbhiḥ), T. rgyal-pași bstan-pa ḥbaḥ-shig-
gyis dban-byas.
47) mūrdhnā, (lit. by the head), T, spyi-bos.
48) Acc. to T., 'ātmarakṣaṇōpāyam ārabhya dvau ślokau 1. C. dharma-rakṣaṇa, in-
stead of atmarakṣaṇa.
49) vicālya (< vi-'v cal).
50) nīta, which is, par excellence, the teaching of the Buddha and is opposite to
neya [-artha). T. gshag (<hjog-pa, laid down), c. T.
51) pratibādhana, T. gnod-pa byed-pa, c
..
52) bheda, T. gshig (<hjig-pa), c.
sa) niti, T. ishul, c. É.
[ 386 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
The fact that people abuse 54) the Sages
And blame 55) the doctrine taught by the Sages,
All this is the Defilement of those whose nature is foolish 56)
And is created by a prejudiced conception 57);
Therefore, your mind should not be attached
To the dirt of the prejudiced conception;
Indeed, only clean cloth can be dyed 58)
But not one that is spoiled by oil and dust. || 21 ||
§ 4.
Causes and Results of the Loss of the Doctrine.
[With reference to the causes of the loss of the Doctrine, there is
one śloka] 59).
(Kārikā 13)
Want of intelligence, want of faith in the virtuous Doctrine 60),
Indulgence in false pride,
Obscured nature through the rejection 61) of the Highest Doctrine,
Interpretation of the conventional sense 62) as the (ultimate] Truth,
Greediness 63), [adherence to] false conception 64),
Devotion to those who hate the Doctrine,
64)
55)
apa-V vad, T. skur-pa, c.
V garh, T. brñas, C. m.
56) vimūdha, T. rmons, C. . T. & C., take kleśa together with vimūdhâtmā-
nām and make the sense of 'of or by those whose nature is afflicted by kleśa and vimūdha'.
But it is not the case.
57) abhiniveśadarśana, T., shen-lta, c. 95 ME.
58) ranga-vikrtim upaiti, T. tshon-gyis rnam-bsgyur, C. .
58) Acc. to T, kșatihetum ārabhya ślokaḥ 1. C. “saddharmakşatim ārabhya ...
60) adhimukta-śukla-viraha, T. dkar-mos bral, c. The
61) vyasana, T. phons-pa, c. For this defect, c. 8
EB (obscu-
ration caused by the dharmâpavāda in the past).
62) neyârtha, T. dran-don, C. Ti (imperfect meaning).
63) lobha-gredhatā. Both lobha & gredha have the same sense. Probably it is
merely a repetition for arranging syllables. But T. rñed-la brtam (lābha-gredha, greed of
attaining something) and c. (adherence to worship and respecting).
64) darśana in the sense of drsti, i.e. mithyādịşti.
T
[ 387 ]
26



J. TAKASAKI
Keeping at distance 65) from those who convey the Doctrine 66),
And delighting in the inferior Doctrine 67),
By all this, one becomes deprived of the Doctrine of the Saint 68).
// 22 //
[With reference to the result of this loss, there are two ślokas] 69).
(Kārikās 14-15)
The wise one need not be so much afraid of fire,
Of violent poison of snake, of murder, or of lightning 70),
As he should be afraid of the loss 71) of the profound Doctrine 72)
Because a fire, a snake, an enemy, and lightning,
At most, may deprive one of [this] life
But one will not go, by these causes,
To the most terrible world of Avici. || 23 ||
Even one who, repeatedly serving 73) bad friends 74),
Is hostile to the Buddha 75), and commits the acts 76)
Of killing mother, father, and the Saints 77),
65) āra (distance, near or far) T. bsrirs, c. M.
66) dharmabhrt, T. chos-ḥdsin, C. *.
67) hina, here, stands for hinayāna. So C. f. E.
68) For arhat, c. 1. C. adds To At as the general cause.
69) Acc. to T. & C., " kșatiphalam ārabhya dvau ślokau /'.
70) For aśani, T. thog, C. [E TE KLIK. C., adds * BITI F
JK
71) T. ‘rnams' is a mistake for ‘rams' (kșati).
72) C. adds Beku (blame of those who know the doctrine). It is
probably an intentional addition by the C. translator, and this addition corresponds to
the Introductory verses in C. and one additional verse after v. 24 referring to the neces-
sity of having respect towards " dharmabhāņaka'. See below.
73) pratisevya. About this form, see J's note on this word. c. i. (to approach).
74) pāpa-suhrd, T. sdig-grogs, C. E k.
75) buddha -duşțâśaya, C. U l IIL (to injure the Buddha with bad in-
tention.
76) For ācaraṇakſt, T. bya-ba-min-byed (to do what is not to be done). bya-ba-
min anācaraņa (vice).
77) arihat (BHS)
arhat (ari-han, one who kills the enemy. T. “dgra-bcom-pa'
for Arhat is according to this etymology).
[ 388 ]



The Rat na gotravibhā g a
And breaks the unity of the Highest Community 78),
Even that one can quickly become delivered from that sin
If he meditates upon 79) the meaning 80) of the Doctrine;
But, how would it be possible for the Liberation to arise
In one whose mind is hostile to the Doctrine 81) ! // 24 ||
§ 5. Conclusion.
[Here, at the end we have one śloka in order to turn the merit acqui-
red by the author through this teaching towards the people] 82).
(Karika 16)
I have thus duly expounded the 7 subjects,
The 3 Jewels, the perfectly pure Essence 83),
The Immaculate Enlightenment, the [Buddha's] Properties and
Acts;
By the merit I have acquired through this,
May all living beings come to perceive
78) These 5 are regarded as the worst sins for the Buddhist. Cf. Mvyut. 122, panca-
nantaryāni, (C. I
Fi. THE X). The first one in this text comes at the end and is called
' tathāgatasyântike duștacitta-rudirôtpādanam'as C. reads (see Note 75).
70) nidhyāna, T. res-par bsams-pa, C.
80) Instead of dharmârtha, T. has dharmatva' and C. ' saddharma’.
81) C. adds one verse more referring to the necessity of having respect towards the
dharmabhāņaka. It runs as follows:
若人令眾生學信如是法 彼是我父母亦是善知識
彼人是智者以如來滅後 邪見顛倒入正道故
(If one lets the people study this doctrine and teaches how to believe in it, he is
as our parents and is a good leader, a wise man, because he lets the people, after the
Buddha's parinirvāṇa, turn away from the wrong view and enter the right path).
Note that this additional verse is not found in MSbh (P).
82) This heading is lacking in T. and is reconstructed according to C. (依彼所
說法所得功德,以用迴向故,說三
Cf. MSbh (P) 270 a:
聚寶界如覺德業 我說句義所生善
因此願悉見彌陀 由得淨眼成正覺
83) vyavadānadhātu, T. rnam-par-byar-khams, c. 2. = tathāgatagarbha.
These 7 are called 'vajrapada' by the commentator in the open verse of this treatise.
Therefore, the genuine character of this verse as a Kārikā is somewhat doubtful.
[ 389]



J. TAKASAKI
86)
The Lord Amitāyus endowed with infinite light 84),
And, having seen him, ma
may they, owing to the arising
Of the immaculate vision of the Doctrine in them,
Obtain the Supreme Enlightenment. // 25 //
The summary of topics discussed in these 10 ślokas (vv. 16–25) should
be known by the following 3 verses.
Owing to what basis, for what motive,
How and what is expounded [in this treatise],
And what is the natural outflow [of the Buddha's Doctrine],
These topics are explained by the [first] 4 ślokas 85). || 26 ||
Two ślokas refer to the means of self-protection
And one, to the cause of the loss [of the Doctrine] 87),
And then, the [following] two ślokas 88)
Explain the result of this loss. // 27 //
And finally, the acceptance
the Doctrine]
By those living in the world of Sāmsāra 90)
And their acquisition of Enlightenment;-
In short, these 2 results of teaching of the meaning
Of the Doctrine 91) are explained by the last śloka. // 28 //
Thus is finished the fifth chapter entitled “the Merits of Faith' in the
ANALYSIS OF THE GERM OF THE JEWELS, a Treatise on the
Ultimate Doctrine of the Great Vehicle with the commentary [named]
* the Summary of meaning of the ślokas'. // 5 //
89) [of
84)
anantadyuti, T. mthaḥ-yas ḥod-mnaḥ. An epithet of the Lord Amitāyus, for
which C. usual translation is most be. But here, C. THE TH Pro .
For Amitāyus, C. FE , T. tshe dpag-med. This prayer to the Lord Amitāyus
is also found in the Mahāyāna-śraddhôtpāda-śātra, which is one of the treatises on
the tathāgatagarbha theory. It seems that there is a certain relationship between the
Amitāyus-cult and the tathāgatagarbha theory.
85) Of these 5 topics, the first 2 are taught in v. 16, the third, in v. 17, the 4th
in v. 18, and the 5th in v. 19, respectively.
86) atmasamraksaņôpāya. Instead of samrakṣaṇa, T. reads samsodhana. But C.
ht.] as S. This topic, in vv. 20, 21.
v. 22.
vv. 23, 24.
89) kşānti, T. bzod-pa, C. WEES.
samsāra-mandala, T. ḥkhor-gyi dkyil-ħkhor, c. t (= sattvāḥ).
01) dharmârthavāda, T. chos-brjod-pa, C. om. In accordance with the insertion of
one verse after v. 24, C. adds the following summary:
DIT EL REN & Hill .
87)
88)
90)
[ 390 ]



APPENDIX ES



APPENDIX I
RATNAGOTRA-VIBHAGA
(śloka-grantha) 1)
I
1
(Saraņa-traya)
Yo Buddhatvam anādimadhyanidhanam śāntam vibuddhaḥ svayam
Buddhvă câbudhabodhanârtham abhayam mārgam dideśa dhruvam /
Tasmai jñānakſpâsivajravaradhụg-duḥkhân kuraîkacchide
Nānādrggahanôpagūdha-vimatiprākārabhettre namaḥ // 1 || (v. I, 4)
Yo nâsan na ca san na câpi sadasan nânyaḥ sato nâsato
“sakyas tarkayitum niruktyapagataḥ pratyātmavedyaḥ śivah
Tasmai dharmadivākarāya vimalajñānâvabhāsatvişe
Sarvârambaņarāgadoşatimiravyāghātakartre namaḥ // 2 // (1,9)
Ye samyak pratividhya sarvajagato nairātmyakoțiņa śivām
Taccittaprakrtiprabhāsvaratayā kleśâsvabhāvêkşaņāt /
Sarvatrânugatām anāvrtadhiyah pakyanti sambuddhatăm
Tebhyaḥ sattvaviếuddhyanantavişayajñānêkşaņebhyo namaḥ // 3 // (I, 13)2)
(Gotra)
Buddhajñānântargamāt sattvarāśes
Tannairmalyasyâdvayatvāt prakſtyā
Bauddhe gotre tatphalasyôpacārād
Uktāḥ sarve dehino buddhagarbhāḥ || 4 || (I, 27) 3
Sadā prakſtyasamklișțaḥ śuddharatnâmbarâmbuvat |
Dharmâdhimuktyadhiprajñāsamādhikaruņânvayaḥ // 5 // (1,30)
3)
1) for this selection, see Introduction, II, § 3.
2) In the present text, we have a śloka (v. 23) between this and the next one, refer-
ring to the 4 aspects of gotra.
3) C. puts verse 29 as a “ Karikā' after this.
[ 393 ]



J. TAKASAKI
Subhâtmasukhanityatvaguņapäramitāphalaḥ4)
Duḥkhanirvicchamaprāpticchandapraạidhikarmakaḥ // 6 (I, 35)
Mahôdadhir ivâmeyaguṇaratnâkşayâkaraḥ /
Pradīpavad anirbhāgaguņayuktasvabhāvataḥ // 7 || (I, 42)
Pșthagjanâryasambuddhatathatâvyatirekataḥ /
Sattveşu jinagarbho 'yam desitas tattvadarsibhiḥ || 8 || (I, 45)
Asuddho "suddhaſuddho 'tha suvibuddho yathākramam
Sattvadhātur iti prôkto bodhisattvas tathāgataḥ // 9 || (I, 47)
Sarvatrânugatam yadvan nirvikalpâtmakam nabhah
Cittaprakſtivaimalyadhātuḥ sarvatragas tathā // 10 // (I, 49)
Yathā sarvagatam saukşmyādākāśam nôpalipyate /
Sarvatrâvasthitaḥ sattve 5) tathā 'yam nôpalipyate // 11 // (I, 52)
Yathā sarvatra lokānām ākāśa udayavyayaḥ /
Tathaîvâsamskſte dhātāv indriyāņām vyayôdayaḥ || 12 || (I, 53)
Yathā nâgnibhir ākāśam dagdhapūrvam kadācana /
Tathā na pradahanty) enam mộtyuvyādhijarāgnayaḥ // 13 // (I, 54)
Pșthivy ambau jalam vāyau vāyur vyomni pratişthitaḥ /
Aprathișțhitam ākāśam vāyvambukşitidhātuşu || 14 || (I, 55)
Skandhadhātvindriyam tadvat karmaklesapratiſthitam /
Karmakleśāḥ sadā 'yonimanaskārapratişthitāḥ || 15 || (I, 56)
Ayoniśomanaskāraś cittaśuddhipratişthitaḥ /
Sarvadharmeņu cittasya prakſtis tv apratişthitā || 16 || (I, 57)
Pșthividhātuvaj jñeyāḥ skandhâyatanadhātavaḥ /
Abdhātusadşśā jõeyāḥ karmakleśāḥ śarīriņām || 17 || (I, 58)
Ayonisomanaskāro vijñeyo vāyudhātuvat/
Tad-amūlâpratişthānā prakſtir vyomadhātuvat // 18 // (I, 59)
Cittaprakệtim ālinā 'yoniso manasaḥ kṣtiḥ
Ayoniśomanaskāraprabhave klesakarmaņi // 19 / (I, 60)
Karmakleśâmbusambhūtāḥ skandhayatanadhātavaḥ /
Utpadyante nirudhyante tatsamvartavivartavat || 20 || (I, 61)
Na hetuḥ pratyayo nâpi na sāmagri na côdayaḥ
Na vyayo na sthitiś cittaprakṣter vyomadhātuvat || 21 || (I, 62)
Cittasya yā “sau prakſtiḥ prabhāsvarā
Na jātu sā dyaur iva yāti vikriyām /
Āgantukai rāgamalâdibhis tv asāv
Upaiti samklesam abhūtakalpajaiḥ // 22 // (I, 63)
Nirvșttiyyuparamarugjarāvimuktām ?)
-
4) J's Text & T. pāramitā phalam.
5) Ms. B. satvo. T. sarvasattveșvavastithas tathầyam nôpalipyate.
6) J's text reads pradahati.
7) J's text reads vimuktā.
( 394 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
Asyaîva prakſtim ananyathâvagamya /
Janmâdivyasanam ſte 'pi tannidānam
Dhimanto jagati kịpôdayād bhajante // 23 // (I, 66)
Ananyathậtmā “kşayadharmayogato
Jagaccharaṇyo 'naparântakoțitaḥ /
Sadā 'dvayo 'sāv avikalpakatvato
‘vināśadharmā 'py akệtasvabhāvataḥ || 24 || (I, 71)
Sa dharmakāyaḥ sa tathāgato yatas
tad āryasatyam paramârthanirvștiḥ /
Ato na buddhatvam ște érkaraśmivad
Guņâvinirbhāgatayā “sti nirvștiḥ // 25 // (I, 84)
(desanāprayojana)
Śünyam sarvam sarvathā tatra tatra
Jñeyam meghasvapnamāyākſtâbham
Ity uktvaîvam buddhadhātuḥ punaḥ kim
Sattve sattve 'stîti buddhair ihôktam || 26 || (I, 156)
Linam cittam hinasattveşv avajñā
'bhūtagrāho bhūtadharmâpavādaḥ
Ātmasnehaś câdhikaḥ pañca doşā
Yeşām teşām tatprahāņârtham uktam // 27 / (I, 157)
iti ratnagotravibhāga-ślokagranthaḥ samāptaḥ 1)
-
[ 395 ]



APPPENDIX II
CORRECTION & EMENDATION TO THE SANSKRIT TEXT
OF THE RATNAGOTRAVIBHAGA
(This table excludes those errata which were already corrected by the publisher).
(Page, line)
for
2.9 svaprajũayā draptum vã
3.2 bhagavan tathā-
3.4 -dharmā , avi-
3.16
-parivartānugatāni
4.14
anyonyam bodhisattva
5.1 upakaraṇatām
5.10, 12 utkşālya
9.11 vithapati
10.2 abhāvasvabhāvāt
10.7 -anyatamâvićişta-
10.9 abhisambuddhabodeh
11.2 sarvāramvaņa
12.2 -dharmā
12.19 -satyadarśana-
15.4 (after) sprśanti
15.5 (before) katham
15.6
upakleśârtho
16.9 -guddhya
16.10 avaivartyād bha-
18.2 bodhisattvān
18.5
pratītya gambhira-dh.
19.9 bhavati syād
19.10 vadhakapuruşe tasmāt
20.6-7 vyavadānasatyadvaya-
virāgadharma-
20.8 pāramārthikamevâtraņe
20.15 sarvâcara
22.7 lakṣaṇa-
22.15 (before) mahāpřthivi-
Corrigenda
read
(Source)*)
svaprajñayā jñātum vā drașțum (T)
bhagavams tathā-
[vã (grammar)
-dharmāʻvi-
(cf. S. 39.8)
-parivartād anugatāni
(C)
anyonya-bodhisattva-
(context)
upaharaṇatām
(C)
unmīlya ?
(Ms.)
vithapeti
(cf. S. 49.1-2
abhāvasvabhāvān (Acc.) (T)
-anyatamâvašista-
(T, C)
abhisambodhibuddhyā ?
(T)
sarvārambana
(misprint)
-dharmatayeti
(cf. S. 44.14)
-tattvadarśana
(T, S. 13.17)
nâpi cittam samklistam bhavati /
(should be inserted)
(T, C)
upakliştârtho
(cf. S. 22.2)
-śuddhyaiva (or śuddhyā hi) (T)
avaivartyā bha-
(T, C)
bodhisattvayānikān
(context)
gambhira-pratityadharma (Ms. B, T, C)
bhavati / syād
(context)
vadhakapuruṣe / tasmāt
vyavadānasatyadvayalaksana-
virāgadharma-
(T, S. 11.14)
pāramārthikam ekam evâtraņe (T, C)
sarvâkāra
(T)
(to be omitted)
(context)
(mahācakravālapramāņena
mahācakravālaḥ /
(T)
*) T. Tibetan Version of the Ratnagotravibhāga (Sde-dge Edition); C. Chinese
Version of the Ratnagotravibhāga (Taisho Edition); Ms. A. & B. those Mss. used by John-
ston for editing the Sanskrit Text.
[ 396 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
(Page, line)
for
23.13 tathâseşebhyah
24.4
-āryeņa-mārgôpadeśena
24.10 vainayikeșu
24.15 nirnitākāraṇam
24.17 (before) triratnavamsa-
25.9 bodhanā-padam
26.4-5 after v. 27
27.14 sattvârtham nirapekṣatā
28.7
28.16
trividhāḥ
-samatâpatti
29.1
29.6
30.4
30.9
32.4
32.11
34.19
36.2-3
36.5
36.12
36.17
-patitā ihadhārmikā
sattvās tadyathā
-pāramitā phalam |
-hetava eşām
(before nityapāramitā
sarvatra parama-
-nirvāṇa-samāropa-
mithyātva-niyata-
(after praạidhim iti /
pāpasamuccheda-
anāgata-
Corrigenda
read
(Source)
tathā sesebhyaḥ
(C)
-āryamārgôpadesena
(T, C)
vaineyikeșu
(vineya)
nirnānākaraṇam
(T, C)
tryadhvânubaddha (to be inserted) (T, C)
bodhana-padam
(grammar)
(anena kim darśitam)
(context)
sattvârthe nirapekşatā or
sattvärthanirapekṣatā
(T)
dvividhāḥ
(C.AĀS, BGS)
-samatâpti-
(T, context.,
S. p. 29.4)
-patitāś cehadhārmikā
(C)
sattvāḥ caturvidhāḥ /tadyathā (T, C)
-pāramitāphalaḥ / (bahuvr.) (context)
-hetava uktā esām
(Ms. B, T, C)
insert) bodhisattvānām
(T. C)
sarvatraparama
(T)
nrvāṇâsamāropa-
(C)
aniyata-
(C, BGS)
insert) tatra cchando “bhilāṣaḥ / (T, C)
pāpâsamuccheda-
(T)
nipatanti tān upakurvanty
anāgata-
(T, C)
kim
(misprint)
-sādharmyam
(misprint)
avinirbhāgadharmāʻvi-
nirmuktaguņo yad-
(context)
-upagūdhaḥ sam-
(context)
pradahanti
(grammar)
balīyo (comparative degree)
insert) mūlaparicchinnā (Mss., T)
eşaḥ /
(grammar)
-vimuktā-
masyaiva (vimuktām asya-) (C)
śreşthiņo vā gļhapater vaſka- (T, C)
darśanena / sa ca
(context)
-premâlambanataḥ ?
(T)
nipatanti * * *
37.13
38.17
39.6
ki
-sādharmya
avinirbhāgadharmā /
avinirmuktaguṇaḥ / yad-
-upagūdhaḥ / sam-
pradahati
bali
yo
(before sarvadharmā
esa/
40.17
42.11
44.13
45.9
46.2
46.6
46.7
47.17
47.18
48.2-3
48.9
-vimuktā
asyaiva
sreșthiņo gļhapater eka-
darsanena sa ca
ekaputrakâdhyāśāya-
premânunito
śreşthì gọhapatir iti
asravakşayabhijñabhi-
mukhy-
drdhayā'dhyāsayaprati-
pattyā
prativicyêmām-
bodhisattvagaña
śreşthi vā gļhapatir veti
asravakşayabhimukhy-
(T, C)
(C)
50.13
50.17
drąhâdhyāśayapratipattyā
(T, C)
51.11
52.19
prativedhyemām-
bodhisattvaguņa-
(T)
(T)
[ 397 ]



J. TAKASAKI
(Page, line)
for
55.2 tathāgatagarbhasya
55.7
ki
55.19 samadharmatayā
56.3 tathāgato 'nyo
57.2 nișpatsv-asam-
58.13 ekena ca kāramena
61.1 jagat
64.21 ujjñitam-
67.4 rāgâdidvidmoha
67.16
68.6-7
68.13
69.6
70.3
70.3
70.5
71.8
71.9
71.12
71.14
72.5
73.6
aśubhâdibhāvajñāna-
(v. 132
tathāgatagarbha iti
-āvștā
dbidhā
vainayika-
dharmadhātor avi-
vikārā
Corrigenda
read
(Source)
tatḥāgatadhātor
(Ms. B)
kim
(misprint)
śamadharmatayā
(T)
tathāgato nânyo
(context)
nişpatty-asam-
(S. 58.9)
ekena câkāreņa
(T)
jagat-
(misprint)
ujjhitam-
(misprint)
rāgadidvinmoha
(misprint)
(Ms. A)
aśubhâdibhāvanājñāna-
(T, C)
into prose)
(C, context)
tathāgatagarbhā iti
(context)
-āvſtam
(T, C, con.)
dvidhā
(misprint)
vaineyika-
(<vineya)
dharmadhātur avi-
(T, C)
vikārā-
(misprint)
(misprint)
tatra
(misprint)
-advaidhīkāreti
(gram.)
mahādharmadhirājyatvāt (T)
iti parikalpitam asya vacanam iti (context)
sarve
sarve-
va-
tatra-
-advaidhikāro ti
mahādharmâdhirājatvāt
iti parikalpam asya
canāyeti
vikalpayitavyā'dhimok-
tavyā
te'tyantasāsrava-
73.15
74.7
74.19
.
vikalpayitavyā kevalam tv
adhimoktavyā
(T, C)
te 'tyantam sāsrava-
(T)
(change the pargraph from
“yathāca sa...
and con-
nect 'tad yathāʻpi nāma.
after 'prasādhitah/ 'without
changing paragraph.)
(context)
śubha
(misprint)
aviparyastam sūnya-
(T, C)
tatphalam visamayogaḥ / (context)
-visamyogaś ca yathākramam , (C, context)
75.11
76.11
79.15
79.16
79.7
-sabha-
-aparyantam sūnya-
tatphalam dvividham
--visamyogaś ca / yathāk-
ramam
gambhīryaudārya-
-vinirmuktestathāgata-
(after)-prşthalabdham
jātyandhakāyavat
sūtikāmadhyasthita
-amalai stribhiḥ
79.12
79.13
84.18
84.19
gāmbhiryaudārya
(context)
-vinirmukte tathāgata-
(context)
(insert) laukikam
(T, Ms.B)
jātyandharūpavat
(T, C)
sātikāsаdmasthita
(T)
-amalais tribhiḥ
(context)
(to be connected in Devanāgari)
acintyarhattvam
(T, C)
pratyātmaveditam
prāptanirvāņa-
(T, C)
85.8
86.13
acintyaprāptih
pratyātmaveditā
prāpyanirvāņa-
88.7
[ 398)



The Ratna gotravibhāga
Corrigenda
read
(Page, line)
for
90.5
vyanumeyataḥ
(Source)
(C, context)
vyupameyataḥ
V. 69
90.6
vyanumeyo
vуиратено
(C, context)
v. 69
91.14
91.15
92.11
93.6
(T)
(T, C)
tathatāmadhikſtya
(before v. 4)
svayamjñāpanā
apratisamkhyāpahānir
acc. to J's correction)
mușitatā citte
abhayadam
-arkaraśmipravisſta--
93.10
94.2
98.9
(context)
(T, context)
(metre)
tathā-tad-adhikṣtya
(add) uddānam /
svayam jñāpanā-
apratisamkhyāya hānir
(as in the text)
muşitatâcitte
abhayam
-arkaraśmi pravisșta-
(to be separated)
-vad iti
vayam apy acirād
-sthânā'ntaramalā
-vasād ghațţitā
sambuddhabherer upayāti
(context)
100.3
100.10
101.11
102-21
103.16
-tvād iti
adyaiva na cirād
-sthānāntaramalā
-vasād aghațțitā
sambuddhatürya tu yāti
104.14
106.6
108.15
108.16
108.16
111.6
115.1
116.14
117.4
āyānti nikhilam /
kleśagatān dặsty-
visște
buddhasūrye
vineyâdri-tannipāto
-ālokādy-alamkſtāḥ
(before sthāneşv-)
taccittapratyupasthānād
câsya mūlam
āyāti nikhilam,
kleśagatâtmadşrțy-
visţto
buddhasūryo
vinetâdrau tannipāto
-ālokād-alamkřtāḥ
(insert) caturşu
tannityapratyupasthānād
câsyā mūlam
(T)
(context)
(T, context)
(T, ms. B,
context)
(context)
(T, C)
(T)
(T)
(T)
(T)
(T, C)
(T, C)
(context)
(The following headings had better be inserted:)
117.5
(before v. 16)
117.9
117.13
117.17
118.3
(before v. 17)
(before v. 18)
(before v. 19)
(before v. 20)
tatra yadāśraye yannimittam cô-
dāhrtam tadārabhya slokah (C)
yathôdāhſtam tadarabhya slokah/ (T
yadudāhrtam tadarabhya slokaḥ (T)
yenôdāhſtam tadārabhya ślokaḥ/ (T)
ātmarakṣanôpāyam ārabhya dvau
ślokau /
(T)
kşatihetum ārabhya ślokaḥ / (T)
kṣatiphalam ārabhya dvau ślokau/ (T, C)
āptapuṇyapariņamane ślokaḥ / (C)
118.11
118.15
119.5
(before v. 22)
(before v. 23)
(before v. 25)
[ 399 ]



APPENDIX III
DESCRIPTION OF THE ULTIMATE REALITY
by Means of the Six Categories in Mahāyāna Buddhism *)
To describe the characteristics of the tathāgatagarbha (the matrix of
the Tathāgata, i.e. the Buddha's nature), The Ratnagotravibhāga (RGV)
uses in Chap. I the following ten categories: namely, (1) svabhāva, (2) hetu,
(3) phala, (4) karman, (5) yoga, (6) otti, (7) avasthaprabheda, (8) sarvatraga,
(9) avikāra, & (10) asambheda. Similar terms are used in Chap. II as cate-
gories for describing the ultimate reality, i.e. the phala aspect of the ta-
thāgatagarbha. Of its eight categories in all, the first six categories are the
same as those used in Chap. I, i.e. (1) svabhāva to (6) vștti, while the re-
maining two are (7) nitya and (8) acintya.
As for the ten categories in Chap. I, the RGV says in the commentary
that there is a (tenfold) category by which all kinds of explanation of the
meaning of the tathāgatagarbha exist (i.e. are made) with no variance
anywhere in the scripture 1). After a brief explanation of the threefold
meaning of the term tathāgatagarbha made on the basis of v. I, 272), the
statement mentioned above probably means that these ten categories are
commonly used in the scripture for describing the tathāgatagarbha, while
the threefold meaning belongs only to the RGV.
This statement, however, needs to be corrected to some extent by the
following descriptions in the same RGV; namely, after explaining the sixth
category, vstti, the commentary says:
*) This article originally appeared in The Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies,
vol. IX, No. 2, 1961 and is reprinted here with the permission of the editor.
yenârthena sarvatrâviseşena pravacane sarvâkāram tad (= tathāgatagarbha)-artha-
sūcanam bhavati tad api ... RGV, p. 26, 11. 10-11.
2) RGV, p. 26, 11. 5–10. The 3 meanings are: dharmakāyaparispharaṇārtha, tatha-
tâvyatirekârtha, & gotrasambhavârtha. About this threefold meaning, see my article: The
Tathāgatotpattisambhavanirdeśa of the Avatamsaka and the Ratngotravibhāga (Uttara-
tantra), with special reference to the term tathāgatagotrasambhava, Journal of Indian
& Buddhist Studies, Vol. VII, No. 1, 1958, pp. 348–353. Also see Introduction, III, § 2.
[ 400 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
After this passage, with reference to this very category of vstti,
the other [remaining] four categories are to be known through separate
explanations 3).
And also:
All those teachings on the immaculate Ultimate Reality (anāsra-
vadhātu) taught by the Lord in detail through various forms of doctrines
are contracted in brief into these six categories, i.e. svabhāva, hetu, phala,
karman, yoga and vștti 4).
What we come to know from these passages is that a set of categories
which is commonly used, and hence the basic one, is not the whole of the
ten categories, but the first six categories beginning with svabhāva, and
that the object to which is applied this set of six categories is not the ta-
thāgatagarbha alone, but is the Ultimate Reality in every aspect inclusive of
the aspect of tathāgatagarbha, and thirdly that the RGV added four cate-
gories to the regular set in order to explain the mode of manifestation
(vštti) of the tathāgatagarbha. This is proved from the use of the same set
of categories in Chap. II, where the seventh and the eighth categories are
said to be included in the sixth, vịtti 5), as showing special characteristics
of the vștti aspect of the Ultimate Reality characterized as bodhi or āśraya-
parivștti.
Then how is this set of six categories used in the scripture (pravacana)
and what is meant by the term pravacana ?
At first, we shall see how it is applied in the basic verses (śloka) of
the ᎡGV.
.
sadā prakſty-asamklistaḥ śuddharatnâmbarâmbuvat
dharmadhimukty-adhiprajñā-samādhi-karuņânvayah / (v. I, 30)
śubhâtmasukhanityatva-guņapārmitā-phalaḥ|
duḥkhanirvic-chamaprāpticchandapranidhi-karmakah // (I, 35)
mahôdadhir ivā 'meyaguņaratnākṣayākaraḥ|
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
6)
4)
3) ataḥ param etam eva vrttyartham ārabhya tadanye catvāro 'rthāḥ prabhedanirdeśād
eva veditavyāḥ. RGV, p. 40, 11. 5-6.
ye kecid anāsravadhātunirdese nānādharmaparyāyamukheșu bhagavatā vistareņa nir-
distāḥ sarve te ebhir eva samāsataḥ șadbhiḥ svabhāva-hetu-phala-karma-yoga-vrttyarthaiḥ...
RGV, p. 40, Il. 12–14.
6) tribhir gāmbhiryaudāryamāhātmyaprabhāvitair buddhakāyair nityam ā bhavagater
acintyena prakāreņa vartanam vſttiḥ. RGV, p. 79, 11. 16–18.
6) -tā phalam / in the text. The reason for the correction will be shown below.
[ 401 ]



J. TAKASAKI
.
pradīpavad anirbhāgaguņayukta-svabhāvataḥ || (I, 42)
pythagjanarya-sambuddha-tathatâvyatirekataḥ
sattveșu jinagarbho 'yam desitas tattvadarśibhih (I, 45)
(5)
(6)
(Being always undefiled by nature, like the pure [character) of a treasure,
the sky and water:
Following after faith in the [Mahāyāna) doctrine, the excellent intellect,
Meditation and Compassion:-
Having the climax of qualities with respect to purity, unity, happiness
and eternity as its result;
Having aversion from the Suffering and desire for and vow to the attain-
ment of the Quiescence as its functions;-
Being, like an ocean, an imperishable receptacle of treasures of innumerable
qualities,
As being by nature united with its properties inseparably, as a lantern (is
inseparable from its light and others];—
And as its (various manifestations in the forms of] ordinary beings, the
Sages and the Buddhas are not differentiated from the Reality,
[there exists] this Matrix of the Victor (= Tathāgata) among the living
beings;-
Thus is it taught by those who perceived the Truth).
These four verses, though they are interrupted by the commentary
passages, are no doubt composed in a series, whose subject word is jinagar-
bha' in the last verse ?) and in which is applied a mode of the set of six
categories previously known to the author.
Quite a similar application of the same mode of description in a
series of verses is found in the Mahāyānasūtrâlamkāra (MSA).
sarvadharmadvayavara-tathatāviśuddhi-lakṣaṇaḥ
vastujñāna-tadālamba-vaſitâksaya-laksanah // (v. IX, 56)
(1)
sarvatas tathatājñāna-bhāvanā-samudāgamah/
(2)
sarvasatva-dvayâdāna-sarvathâkşayatā-phalah // ®) (IX, 57)
(3)
kāyavākcittanirmāņa-prayogôpāya-karmakah
(4)
samādhi-dhārani-dvāradvayâmeya-samanvitaḥ // (IX, 58)
(5)
svabhāva-dharmasambhoga-nirmāņair bhinnavſttikah
(6)
dharmadhātuviếuddho 'yam buddhānām samudāhſtaḥ|| (IX, 59)
?) Being appositional to 'jinagarbho ‘yam', the reading “-pāramitā-phalaḥ' as
a Bahuvrīhi comp. should be accepted. See note 6.
8) “... tā phalam/' in the text is corrected for the same reason as above. See also
Tib., which has "ņbras-bu-can'.
[ 402 ]



The Ratna gotra vibhāga
(Its characteristic is the purification of the two kinds of obscurations
with regard to the Reality of all phenomena,
And is the inexhaustible controlling power of the knowledge of the nature
and the object of its cognition:-
It is originated from the practices of wisdom with regard to the Reality
in all respects;
It is the result of the inexhaustible formation of the two [i.e. benefit and
happiness) by all possible means for the sake of all the living;-
Its function is the transformation of body, speech and mind as the means
of appliance;
It is endowed with the gates of meditation and mystical formulae and
with the immeasurable accumulation of the two [i.e. bliss and wis-
dom);-
It manifests itself variously by the Body of its own essence, by that of
Enjoyment of the doctrine, and by that of incarnation:-
[Thus] is explained this immaculate Ultimate Reality of the Buddhas.)
These four verses in a series are said to be the ślokas on the topic
of dharmadhātuviśuddhi' which is, at the same time, like “jinagarbha' in
the example of the RGV, the subject word for the whole sentence.
Thus in the application of the same mode of description, the RGV
and the MSA show a close relationship between them, and as the RGV
quotes the MSA in the commentary, it was no doubt the RGV which imita-
ted the MSA. It is especially certain about Chap. II of the RGV which,
though there is no example of application of the same mode in a series
of verses as above, has many traces of the influences of the MSA on its
doctrine (e.g. the triple kāya theory, avikalpajñāna and tatprstalabdha, etc. 9).
But the MSA cannot claim its originality of the use of the six cate-
gories, because according to Prof. Nishio's information 10), almost the same
9) The same is possibly said about the commentary passage of Chap. I, but, as for
the ślokas or basic verses in Chap. I, the influences of the MSA are scarcely observed ex-
cept for the application of the six categories mentioned above.
10) Kyöyū Nishio, Bucchikyōron no kenkyū (in Jap.) (Studies on the BBS and the
Buddhabhūmi-vyākhyāna, studies, translation & the Tib. texts), 2 Vols., Nagoya, 1940.
The following is a comparative table of the 4 verses of BBS & MSA in their Tib. versions.
BBS (Nishio's text. p. 23)
MSA (Peking Mdo-ḥgrel, Phi, 12 b, 2–5;
Repr. Vol. 108, p. 7)
/chos rnams kun-gyi de-bshin-ñid /
chos rnams kun-gyi de-bshin-ñid/
| sgrib gñis ldan dag mtshan-ñid-can |sgrib-gñis dag-paḥi mtshan-ñid-can
|dnos-po śes-pa de dmigs-pa/
|dňos-po śes-pa de-la dmigs /
|dban tshad mi-śes mtshan-ñid-can || |dban zad mi-śes mtshan-ñid do //
|de-bshin-ñid śes thams-cad-nas/
|de-bshin-ñid śes thams-cad-nas /
[ 403 ]
27



J. TAKASAKI
verses as in the MSA mentioned above are found in the Buddhabhūmisūtra
(BBS) towards the end of the text as a kind of concluding verses. Also,
there are other passages in the MSA where the doctrines taught in the BBS
are summarized, and hence the originality seems better to be ascribed to
the BBS.
It is however still difficult to regard the BBS as the only source of the
set of six categories. Because the Yogācārabhūmi (YB), in which is also
found the mention of the same set of categories 11), has not such a clear
theory as that found in the BBS on the buddhakāya or has no exposition of
the four kinds of wisdom (i.e. ādarśa-ñ., samatā-jñ., pratyavekşa-jñ., krtya-
nuşthāna-jñ.), both of which are the central topics of the BBS, and at pre-
sent we have no objective proof to fix the order of composition between the
two treatises. Furthermore, curious enough is the manner of mention of
the said categories in the YB. Namely, it is found in the passage where
the science of grammar (sabda-vidyā or vyākaraņa) is explained as one of
the five sciences (vidyā-sthāna), but without any detailed comment. There
seems to be no use of such a set of terms in Sanskrit grammars although
most of the terms used for the six categories are the technical terms of
grammar. In this respect, I suppose that the set of terms are put or
rather inserted in that passage in connection with the word artha?
(meaning) just because there was a traditional usage of those terms as
a mode of description among the Vijñāvādins, even in the days of the
composition of the YB. What is meant by the term "pravacana’ in the
RGV is, therefore, not necessarily to be affixed to any special scripture or
treatise, but is to be understood as “the word of predecessor'.
Now, we shall proceed to examine the extent of application of the said
categories. Besides their application to the dharmadhātuviśuddhi, there is
another mode of application in the MSA. It is found in a couple of verses
lbsgoms-la yan-dag hgrub-pa-can/
lbsgoms-pa las ni yan-dag hbyun /
(sems-can kun-la gñis bskyed-pa)
sems-can kun-la rnam-kun-tu /
rnam-kun mi-bzad ņbras-bu-can //
gñis bskyod mi-zad ņbras-bu-can //
llus dan nag dan sems sprul-paḥi /
sku dan gsun dan thugs sprul-paḥi //
(sbyor-baủi thabs-kyi las-can yin/
lhbyor-baủi thabs-kyi las-can tel
tin-ne-ḥdsin dan gzuns sgo dan/
tin-ne-ḥdsin dan gzuns sgo dan /
dpag-tu med-pa gñis-dan Idan //
(dpag-tu med-pa gñis-dan ldan //
Iran-bshin chos-rdsogs lońs-spyod dan/ fran-bshin chos-rdsogs lońs-spyod dan/
Isprul-pas tha-dad ķjug-pa-can/
sprul de-dag-gi(s) tha-dad-hjug/
sans-rgyas rnams-kyi chos-kyi dbyins/ lḥdi-ni sans-rgyas rnam-dag-gi/
\rnam dag ḥdi ni yan-dag brjod //
/chos-dbyins rnam-par dag-par bśad //
11) YB (Tib.) Peking Mdo-ḥgrel, Dsi, 230 a, 5-6. (Repr. Vol. 109, p. 304); (Ch)
Taisho, Vol. 30, p. 361 a. The six terms in Tib. are as follows: no-bo-ñid, rgyu, ņbras-bu,
bya-ba (kriyā), [khyad-par-du] sbyor-ba (višeşa-yoga), hjug-pa.
[ 404 ]



The Ratnagotra vibhāga
at the end of the work, which are a kind of eulogy on the Buddha. They
run as follows:
nişpanna-paramārtho 'si, sarvabhūmi-viniḥsstaḥ
· (1, 2)
sarvasatvägratām prāptaḥ, sarvasatvavimocakaḥ (XX-XXI 60) (3, 4)
akşayair asamair yukto guņair, lokeșu dṛśyase /
(5, 6)
maņdaleșv apy, adȚśyaś ca sarvathā devamānusaiḥ|| (61)
(6)
(Thou art the one who is perfect-transcendental,
who has come out of [the practices in] all stages,
who has attained the highest point among all living beings, and makes
them liberate;-
And who is endowed with virtues, inexhaustible and unequalled;
Thou art perceived in various worlds and in the circles [of the assemble of
Bodhisattvas through thy two apparitional Bodies],
However invisible is thy [Body of Essence] by all means to those who
belong to the world of gods and human beings).
According to the Commentary, these two verses refer to the characte-
ristics of the Buddha (buddhalakṣaṇa), among which we find the triple Body
theory under the category of vștti.
The same verses are quoted in the Mahāyānasaņgraha (MS) of Asanga 12)
explaining that they refer to the highest qualities of the Absolute Body
(dharmakāya), and this is commented upon by Vasubandhu: 'the highest'
means 'belonging only to the Mahāyāna, i.e. not common to the Hinayāna ’13).
It seems to show that the use of this set of categories belougs only to the
Mahāyana.
The third mode of application of the six categories is found in the first
two of the dedicative verses placed at the head of the Abhidharmasamuc-
caya-vyākhā, a commentary on the Abhidharmasamuccaya (AS) of Asanga.
They run as follow 14).
/rtogs-pa des gnas dri-med don
(1)
Igan spyod rgya-mtshogi pha-rol gsegs |
(2)
.
13)
12) MS Taisho, 31, 111 a (No. 1592); 131 a (No. 1593); 150 b (No. 1594), Tib. Pe-
king Ed. Mdo-ḥgrel, Li, 46 b 3-6 (Repr. Vol. 112, p. 334).
HA E T H W # THE TI E (Taisho, 31, p. 258 a).
However, this is found only in Paramārtha's translation (No. 1595), and Vasubandhu's
authorship is somehow doubtful.
14) AS. Vyākhyā, Peking Mdo-sgrel, Śi, 143 6 3–5 (Repr.Vol. 113, p. 141). Cf. Taisho, 31,
p. 694b: ### TT # # 1 - t
法自在,善權化導不思議無量希有勝功德自他並
利所依止敬禮如是大覺無等妙法諸聖眾,
[ 405 ]



J. TAKASAKI
.
chos-kun dban-phyug, bsam mi-khyab/
ḥdul-baħi thabs-kyis hdren-pa-can //
Igshal-med legs gyur yon-tan ni
/ran dan gshan don gñis-la brten
sans-rgyas chos dan hphags-pa-yil
|tshogs-lahan de-phyir phyag-htsal-lo //
(3), (4)
(4)
(5)
(6)
.
(I bow to the Buddha, and to the Doctrine and Holy community as well,
because-
He is [by nature] the realization and the immaculate truth established
by it;
Having reached the other shore of the ocean of practices,
And having [attained] the controlling power over the phenomena,
He leads [the living beings] by skillful means and in an inconceivable
manner;-
He is endowed with the immeasurable and marvellous qualities,
And is the foundation of the benefits of his own and of others).
15)
Commenting on these verses by himself, the commentator says
that by the first two there are shown the six categories with respect to the
excellent qualities of the Buddha, i.e. the categories of svabāva, hetu etc.16).
This explanation is exactly on the same line as in the MS.
Thus examining, we have got, I think, a fairly good account of the
idea of the six categories and their applications to the Ultimate Reality,
however it may be called, in treatises of the Vijñānavada. Before giving a
conclusion to this investigation, I must lastly refer to the Abhidharmasa-
muccaya in which is an explanation of this set of categories as one of the
seven methods for interpreting a topic in discussion (sāmkathya-viniscaya)
under the name of artha-viniscaya 17).
The Abhidharmasamuccaya is a kind of classified lexicon of technical
terms of the Mahāyāna Abhidharma, i.e. the works of the Yogācāra
school or the Vijñānavādins. It is divided into two parts, one is the col-
lection of terms concerning the phenomena (laksaņa), the other is that
of terms concerning the interpretation (viniſcaya), and the Sāmkathya-
15) According to Chinese tradition, it is ascribed to Sthiramati, while in Tibet, to
Jinaputra (Rgyal-baḥi sras).
16) AS Vyākhyā, ibid., p. 144 a 2–3.
17) AS (Tib.) Peking, Śi 344 a 345 a 8 (Vol. 113, No. 5555); (C.) Taisho, 31, 693 b;
(Sthiramati) ibid., 765 b-c; (Skt.) ed. by P. Pradhan, Santiniketan, 1950, pp. 102-103
(This passage is restored from Tib. & C.).
[ 406 ]



The Rat na gotra vibhāg a
viniscaya is the last of the four chapters belonging to the latter part.
Being thus situated and in comparison to the other six methods, i.e.,
commentary (vyākhyā), exhibition of difference (prabhidyasamdarśana),
questioning (sampraśna), summary (samgraha), dialogue or logic (vāda),
and implication (abhisandhi), this arthaviniścaya is clearly a mode
of description or interpretation recognized by the authority of the
Vijñānavāda.
The explanation of the six categories in the AS is, however, unsatis-
factory for us. It shows us merely the terms of three to five kinds of each
category 18), but not any example of application of the whole set as exa-
mined above.
Rather, it seems difficult to limit the application exclusively to the Ul-
timate Reality, because the sub-divisions of the six categories include all
the varieties, so that by using one of them any kind of subject, samskſta
or asamskſta, of impure or pure character, can be described. It
may
be
natural from the logical point of view as the terminologies used for the six
categories do not contain any evaluation in themselves. Actually, however,
there is no example of their application to any subject other than the Ulti-
mate Reality, and taking the explanation in the RGV referred to at the
beginning of this article into consideration, we may safely say that there
was a traditional use of the set of six categories among the Vijñānavādins
for describing the Ultimate Reality, and that its latest example available
to us is observed in the AS Vyākhyā.
Additionally, I will give a rough observation on the modified use of
this set of categories in the works belonging to the so-called Tathāgata-
garbha theory. The RGV, though it is written by one of the Vijñānavādins
(it may be sure at least from his knowledge of the use of the said categories),
has established the system of the Tathāgatagarbha theory, and to describe
its doctrine, it modified the six categories according to its own need but
without losing their original character. But the modification was further
extended until the character as categories of general use has disappeared
by mixing or replacing of the new terms which show the characteristics
.
.
18) (1) svabhāva 1. parikalpita, 2. paratantra, 3. parinişpaņņa.
(2) hetu
1. utpatti-, 2. pravstti-, 3. siddhi-.
(3) phala 1. vipāka-, 2. nisyanda-, 3. adhipati-, 4. puruşakāra-, 5. visamyoga-.
(4) karman... 1. upalabdhi, 2. kāritra-, 3. vyāvasāya-, 4. pariņati-, 5. prāpti-.
(5) yoga
1. sāmūhiko y., 2. ānubandhiko y., 3. sāmbandhiko y., 4. āvasthiko y.,
5. vaikāriko y.
(6) vștti ... 1. lakṣaņa-, 2. avasthāna-, 3. viparyāsa-, 4. aviparyāsa-, 5. pra-
bheda-, (Skt. terms are acc. to Pradhan's text).
[ 407 ]



J. TAKASAKI
of the Absolute belonging to the Tathāgatagarbha theory. As such examples
we have the ten categories of the tathāgatabodhi in the Anuttāśrayasūtra
(AAS), the ten categories of the tathāgatagarbha in the Buddhagotraśātra
(BGS), and the twelve categories of the bodhicitta in the Dharmadhātvavi-
śeşaśāstra (DAS) 19).
10) AĀS, Taisho, 16, p. 470 c; BGS, Taisho, 31, p. 796 b; DAŚ, Taisho, 32, p. 892 a.
(All of these works are kept only in the Chinese Tripitaka, and their Skt, titles are
restored from C.).
( 408 )



INDEXES



INDEX OF SANSKRIT TERMS
1. Terms in brackets refer to those not found in the Ratna.
2. Terms with the mark § refer to the subject matters of the text.
3. Reference is to the pages in the present work or section numbers applied in the
present work.
4. Abbreviations:
VP vajrapada (1-7)
RG
ratnagotra (4 aspects) (I-IV)
TG tathāgatagarbha (3 meanings) (a-c)
(10 aspects) (I-X)
(9 illustrations) (1-9)
B
bodhi (RG II) (8 aspects) (I-VIII)
G
guņa (RG III) (I-IV)
vais. catur-vaiśāradya (G I)
bala daśa-bala (G II)
āven. āveņika-buddhadharma (G III)
mahāp. mahāpuruşalakṣaṇa (G IV)
K karman (RG IV) (9 illustrations) (I-IX)
simile
S.
A
ambu, 317
a-kalpana(-jñāna), 314
a-kuto-bhaya, 349
a-křtaka, 315
akſta-svabhāvaſtā], 92
a-křtrima, 289
akſtrima-dharma, 258
a-kşaya, 74
akşaya-dharma-yogaſtā], 92
akşayya (= akşaya), 273
a-kşūņam (kşūņa dosa), 76, 192
a-gocara-vişaya, 188
a-gotra, § VIII (III-IV)-5', 40
agni (s. for mặtyuvyādhijarā), 90
agra-yāna, 353
agra-sattva (= buddha), 346
a-grāhya, 114
aghoṣavat, 130
a-cakşumat, 296
acala-prākāra, 339
acalā (bhūmi), 92, 94, 256
a-citta, 159, 342
a-cintya, (B VIII), § XIII (VIII), 108, 311
acintyatā, 130
acintyatva, 70, 164
acintya-namana-cyuta, 321
acintya-prakāra, 260
acintyā pāriņāmikī cyutiḥ, 82, 84, 92,
112, 216
acintyârhattva, 326
acirasthāyin, 240
agra, 74
agra-bodhi (VP 5, RG II), 23, 68, 154
~ -aye vyākaraṇam, 116
[ 411 ]



J. TAKASAKI
a-cyuta (pada), 112, 319, 381
ajasram, 273
a-jāti, 70, 167, 244
a-jñāna, 120
ajñānândhakāra-vidhamana, 86
aţavī, 262
anda-koşa, 282
anda-sāra, 286
a-tattva-bhāvitva, 334
a-tat-prahita, 126, 363
a-tat-bhāva, 328
a-tat-svabhāva, 169
atatsvabhāvākhyāna, 116, 328
a-tarkya, 118
ativāhana, 331
a-tulya-tulya, 318
atulyatulya-dharmatva, 110
a-tęptatā, 245
atyanta-tamo'paha, 130
atyanta-pācaka, 130
atyanta-vināśa, 104
atyantânanyathābhāva, 217
a-dęśya, 114
adşşța-pūrva, 209
a-dvaya, 78, 92, 114, 164
advayatā, 70, 114, 164
a-dvitiyam pauruşam sthāma, 232
adhanya, 369
adhika, 306
adhikṣtya, 180
adhigama, 142
adhigama-dharma, 26, 74, 182
~ & deśanā-dharma, 30, 74, 182
adhiprajñā (= prajñā), 200
adhimukta-śukla-viraha, 132, 387
adhimukti, 130, 382; (bala 5) 120, 339;
(-bhāvanā) (TG II hetu 1), 80, 82, 84, 86
adhimukty-anuśamsa, § XVIII, 130, 380
adhişthāna, 313
~ -samanvāgama, 108
adhişthita, 193
adhyālambati, 246
adhyāśaya, 205
an-akşarôkta, 376
anantâcintya-rasa-rasagratā (mahāp. 21),
122, 345
ananta-dyuti (amitābha), 390
ananyathā (= yathāvat), 243
ananyathā'tmā, 92, 256
ananyathā-bhāva (svabhāva) (TG b), 78,
201, 217
an-anya-poși-ganya, 178
an-apakarşaņa, 219
an-apacaya, 239
an-aparânta-koți(tā), 92, 256
an-abhilāpya, 70, 118
an-abhisamiskāra, 216
anabhisamskặta-kriyā, 116
an-abhisamskřti, 328
an-argha, 248
an-artha, 257
-apatita, 257
anartha-jāla-vigama, 371
an-avadya, 193
anavarâgra (-samsāra), 232, 367
an-avasthita, 240
an-avāpta, 185
an-ācāryaka, 158
anātma-samjñā, 82
a-nātha, 275
anātha-vesman, 275
anātha-śāla, 275
anāthâvasatha, 275
an-ādi-kālika, 167
anādikāliko dhātuḥ, 102
anādi-bhūta, 86, 224
an-ādi-madhya-nidhana, 68
an-ādimadhyânta, 114
an-ābhāsa-gamana, § XVIII (IV), 126,
244, 368
an-ābhoga, 76, 114, 128, 147, 373
anābhogatā, 68, 124, 156
anābhogâpraśrabdha (buddhakārya), 351
an-āvaraņa-gāmin, 205
anāvarapa-dharma, 233
an-āvilata, 359
an-āsrava, 112
anāsrava-karman, 82, 84, 92, 279
anāsravam karma, 82, 215
anāsravatva, 112, 321
anāsrava-dhātu, 92, 104, 214, 231, 297, 401
anāsrava-pada (= anāsravadhātu; dhar-
makāya), 376
an-āsvādana(tā), 252
a-nitya, 74
-duḥkha-anātma-aśubha, 74, 104
~ -duḥkha-anātma-śānti (śānta), 116,
126
[ 412 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
anitya-samjñā, 82
a-nimitta, 112, 131, 324
animittatā, 114
a-niyata-rāśi, 161
aniyataḥ sattvarāśiḥ, 80, 205
a-nirodhatā, 114
anişthāgata-bodhisattva-sāņtānika, 98
a-nişthita, 76, 187
a-nişpatti, 124, 354
anugata, 146, 283, 287
anugāmin, 158
anuguņam, 76, 192
anugraha, 384
anujāta, 80, 207
anutișthate (anu/sthā), 191
an-uttara, 118
anuttaram karma, 76
anuttara-tathāgata-jñāna-sama, 72
[anuttarâsraya), 49, 51
anuttarā samyak-sambodhiḥ, 144
an-uttrasta-gati, 340
anutpattika-dharma, 264
an-utpādatā, 114
anutpădânirodha (tathāgata), 68, 74, 88,
128, 377
anutpādånirodhatā, § XVII-5, 15, 50, 128
an-udgraha, 118, 334
an-upacaya, 239
an-upāya-patita (sattva), 80, 203
anupūrva-naya, 181
anupūrva-samutpāda-samudāgama, 147
anubhava, 368
anuvbhū, 191
anusamsa, 23, 222
anusaya, 70, 169, 245, 278, 366
anuśaya-vat (bāla), 170
anuśāsana, 363
anuśāsti-prātihārya, 126, 363
anuśleşa, 153
anuşanga, 283
anusandhi (vāsanā-). 147; (artha-) 219
a-nairyāṇikatva, 361
antadvaya-vivarjita, 114, 327
antar-amala, 358
antarīkşavat (= ākāśavat) (G III)
antargama (buddhajñānântargamāt), 197
antargata, 232
antardhi, 394
antarvat, 275
antaḥpura-rati-krīdā, 116, 329
antika, 249
anya-tīrthya, 203
anyonya(m), 149
-anvaya, 200
anvādhana, 246
apakarşa, 216
apakāra, 248
apagata-kāca, 151
apaneya, 104
a-parapratyayâbhisambodhi, 68, 156
a-parapratyayôdita, 156
aparādha, 363
aparântakoţi-niştha, 82, 213
aparântakoţi-sama, 74, 184, 268
aparāhata, 342
a-parinirvāṇa-gotra, 220
aparinirvāṇagotraka, 80, 84, 202
aparinirvāṇa-dharma, 86
a-parisuddha (kşetra), 116, 330
a-parimita, 264
a-paryanta koţi-gūdha, 231, 268
apa/vad, 387
apavāda, 302
apſthag-bhāva (= yoga) (TG V), 86
a-praņihita (vimokşamukha 3), 151
a-pratikūlo darśanena, 246
a-pratigha (= apratihata), 114, 176
apratighāta, 112
a-pratipraśrabdha (K), 76, 124, 147
a-pratişthāna, 323
apratisthānatā, 114
apratisthāna-müla, 241
apratișțhita-nirvāṇa, § VIII (III-IV)-4',
56, 80, 84, 204, 334
apratișțhita-pada, 220
a-pratihata (yāvadbhāvikatā), 72, 176
apramāņa (catur-apramāṇāni), 379
a-prameya, 114, 263, 327
apravſtti-lakṣaṇa, 355
a-praśrabdhitaḥ, 351
a-prādesikatva, 126
apsaras, 356
abudha (= abuddha), 24, 155, 158
abhaya, 343
abhayatva, 158
abhaya-da, 343
abhāva, 74, 181, 182
abhijāta, 151
abhijñā, 86, 185, 227
abhinirvartayati, 238
[ 413 ]



J. TAKASAKI
abhinirvștti, 215
abhinirhāra, 263
abhinivesa, 158
abhinivesa-darśana, 387
a-bhinna, 114, 325
abhinna-prakſti, 336
abhiprasanna, 365
abhiprasāda, 155
abhimukhi (bhūmi), 250, 252
abhimukhi-bhavati, 251
abhirati, 210
abhilāpa, 166
abhilāşa, 222
abhivyakti-karaņa, 70, 164
abhişeka, 172, 335
abhişeka-labdhā bodhisattvāḥ, 118
abhişyandana, 317
abhisaņskāra, 217, 222
abhisamskặta, 250
abhisaņdhāya, 199, 322
abhisamaya, 182
abhisamaya-paryavasāna, 74
abhisamasya, 165
abhisambuddha, 94
abhisambodha, 157
abhisambodhi, 68
abhūta-kalpa, 237
abhūta-grāba, 106, 305
abhūta-dharma, 106
abhūta-vastu-nimittârambaņa, 70, 169
abheda, (TG X), 199
abhedya, 348
abhyutkşepa, 246
abhy-utykşip, 247
abhyupāya, 274
abhyupekṣaṇa, 342
a-mala, 94, 108, 114, 262
amalā bodhi (RG II), 24
amalârka (mohavisamyoga), 110
amitāyus (rşi) (a Buddha), 132, 390
amukta-jña (buddhadharma), 24, 145,
168, 235, 259
amukta-jñāna (= amuktajña), 145, 292
amūla-mūla, 241
a-mțşā-moșa-dharmitva, 94, 259
amedhya, 100
ambuda (klesa), 124
a-yathā-bhūta (= atatsvabhāva), 169
a-yoni-manas-kāra, 236
ayoniśo manasaḥ kṣtiḥ, 237
ayoniśo-manasikāra, § III-4, 23, 59, 70,
88, 166, 236
ayoniśomanaskāra, 236
arihat (= arhat), 388
arūpitva, 114
arka (s. for buddhatva), 114, 355
artha, 142
~ & vyañjana, 66, 142
artha-pada, 198
arthavat, 385
arthavad-dharmapada-upasamhita, 132
[artha-viniscaya], 407
artha-sandhi, 199
artha-sādhana (RG IV), 24, 130, 382
arthânubhava, 228
arpaņa-bhāva, 362
arhat, 82, 98, 388
arhattva, 114
arhat-sāņtānika, 98
alamkāra, 152
alpa-phala, 269
avacchanna, 282
avadhārayati, 263
a-vandhya, 358
avabodha, 72, 176
avabhāsa, 152
avabhịtka, 364
avaruddha, 326
ayalīyanā, 249
avavāda, 363
avasişțatā, 161
avasāna-gata, 149
avasānika, 224
avasthā (a-c), § VIII (IX)
avasthā-prabheda, VIII (VII) (TG VII),
88, 199, 230
avākyavattva, 118
a-vikalpa, 76, 114, 116
avikalpa(tā) (tva), 92, 124
avikalpa-jñāna, 70, 168
& tatprsthalabdha, 58, 108, 110
avikalpa-dhātu, 302
avikalpa-lokottara-jñāna, 108
avikalpataḥ (K), 76
avikāra, 74, 100; § VIII (TG IX), 88,
199, 234, 241
avikāritva, § VIII (IX a-IX c), 88, 90, 92
avidyā, 82, 215
avidyâkāra, 70, 169
[ 414 ]



The Ratna go tra vibhā g a
a-
avidyā-vāsa-bhūmi, 38, 82, 84, 92, 100,
124, 214
avidyāvāsabhūmi-samgļhīta (-klesa), 98,
278
a-vināśa, 174
avināśa-dharma, 92
avināśa-dharmin, 110
avināśitva, 110, 321
avinirbhāga (= yoga, TG V), 24, 86
avinirbhāga-guņa-dharmatva, 266
avinirbhāga-dharma, 104, 188, 292
avinirbhāga-dharman, 144
avinirbhāga-dharmatā, 76
avinirbhāga-vștti, 315
avinirmukta-klésakósa (tathāgatagarbha),
74, 168
avinirmukta-guņa, 228
avinirmukta-jñāna, 24, 145
avinirmuktajñāna-guņa, 144
avinivartanīya-bhūmi, 177
a-viparokşa, 265
a-viparyasta, 86, 230, 302
a-viparyāsa, 208
a-vipralambha, 294
a-vimala (śrāvaka & pratyekabuddha),
68, 171
a-virata, 76
a-vivartika (bodhisattva), 92
a-vivartya (-dharma-cakra), 151
a-viśeşaņa, 198
a-visamvāditva, 211
avaivartika (bodhisattva), 72, 172, 255
avyatibhedatā, 100
a-vyatireka, 198
aśani, 366, 388
a-saraņa, 74
aśuci-samsārâbhirati, 82
aśuci-samkāra-dhāna (TG 4, for klesa)
96
a-śuddha (bāla-pýthagjana), 68, 98, 161;
(-avasthā), § VIII (IX a), 88, 231
aśuddha-bhāvanā, 279
aśuddha-bhūmi, 98
aśuddhabhūmi-gata-klesa, 98, 278
aśuddha-buddha (avasthā), § VIII (IX b)
88, 90, 231
aśubha-samjñā, 82
aśubhâdi-bhāvanā-jñāna, 98
a-sūnya, 104, 259
aśūnyatā, 106
a-saikņa (buddha), 183
aśaikșa-samtānika, 228
a-ślesa, 270
așțamyādi-bhūmitraya-bhāvanā-jñāna,
98
așțādaśâveņika-buddhadharma-samanvā.
gata (buddha), § XV (III), 120, 341
a-samsarga, 212
~ vihārâbhirati, 82, 212
a-samskſta, 20, 26, 112, 114, 118, 143,
156, 327
asamskſtatva, 112, 156
asamskệta-dharma, 246
asamskệta-dhātu, 236
asamskſta-pada, 112, 257
asamskſtapadatva, 112, 321
a-samhārya, 377
a-sakta, 114
a-samkoca, 222
a-samkhya, 94, 114, 327
a-samkhyeya, 262
a-sanga (yathāvadbhāvikatā), 72, 176
(buddha-jñāna), 189
& apratigha (apratihata), 112
asangataḥ, 189
a-samgati, 171
asatkāma, 361
asatya, 74, 182
asad-ātmagrahâbhirati, 82
a-sama, 114, 327
a-samavadhāna, 171
asamāropaņa, 219
asamāhita (citta) (āveņ. 4), 120, 341
a-sambaddha, 268, 292
a-sambhinna, 114, 327
asambheda, (TG X) S VIII (X), 94, 258
a-sāra-müla (sarvadharma), 241
asi (s. for jñāna), 68
asukhatva, 361
astamgama, 238
a-stambhita, 340
astambhitatva, 120
astitva, 130, 382
~-guṇavattva-śaktatva, 130, 382
asparśa-dharmin, 172
a-svabhāva, 172
asvāmikatā, 248
ahamkāra, 104, 297
abitatva, 361
ahlādaka, 349
[ 415 )



J. TAKASAKI
A
ākara, 21; (ratna-), 86, 225
ākāra, 264, 266
ākāśa (s. for cittaprakſti), 88
(for dharmakāya), 100
(for tathāgata, animittatva), 112, 116
(for āveņikabuddhadharma, G III), 122
(for buddhakarman, K VIII), 128, 355
ākāśa-dhātu, 290
~ paryavasāna, 82, 213
ākāśalakṣaṇo buddhāḥ, 112
ākāśavat (buddha), Š XV (III), 122, 124;
§ XIII-2 (VIII), 128
ākāśa-syabhāvatā (buddhakāya), 193
ākāśôpama (... nișthāgamana), 213
āgantuka, 108, 124
āgantuka-klesa, 22, 44
~ & cittaprakřti, see cittaprakſti
āgantukatā, 228
āgantuka-mala, 104
ācaraṇa-kſt, 388
ādhya, 316
ātman, 40; (TG III, āvaraņa 2), 82, 207,
208, 211
ātma-darśana, 80, 205
ātma-drsţi, 366
ātma-pāramitā, 56, 84, 209
ātma-prapañca, 84
ātma-bhāva, 274
ātmar-bhari, 179
[ātma-rakşaņôpāya), § XVIII-3, 132, 386
[ātma-buddhi], § XVIII-2, 132
ātma-samrakṣaṇôpāya, 390
ātma-samjñā, 82, 208
ātma-sattva-sama-sneha, 106, 309
ātma-sneha, 55, 106, 306
ātmâparādha, § XVII-2 (II), 126
ātmâbhipreta, 211
ātmâvajñāna-dosa, 106, 307
ātmôpādāna-mūla, 288
ādāna-nimitta, 324
ādi-kşaya, 174
ādi-prakſti-śāntatā, 94, 259
ādi-nirodha, 72
ādi-pratijñā, 118, 332
ādi-praśānta, 118
ādeśanā-prātihārya, 126, 363
ädhāra, 60, 102, 292
[änantaryāni, pañca-), 132
āniñjya, 279
āniñjya-samskārôpacaya, 279
ānupūrvī, 159
āpanna-sattva-nārī (TG 8, s. for klesa),
96, 275
ſāpta-punya-pariņamana), § XVIII-5, 132
āptâgama, 132, 384
~ & yukti, 132
āpti-niştha, 154
ā bhava-gateḥ, 116, 157
ā bhavâgrataḥ, 157, 376
ā bhava-sthiteḥ, 157, 377
ābhoga-kriyā, 193
āmişa-rasa, 151
āra, 388
āraṇya-pravicaraña, 368
ārambana, § III-4, 163, 170, 194
ārambaņa-carita (bāla), 170
ārambaṇamykſ, 170
ārūpya, 379
ārūpya (-samāpatti), 360
[ārūpyâvacara-devavimāna), 190
ārņava, 371
ārya, 165; (= bodhisattva) (TG VI b), 86,
231; (= buddha), 340
ārya-gocara, 253
āryapudgala-sāņtānika, 98
ārya-mārga, 192
ārya-satya, 26, 94, 348
āryâștânga, 365
ärşa, 385
ārşabha, 183
ārşabha-sthāna, 183
ārşa-vacas, 132
ſālaya-vijñāna), 8, 52, 53, 58 f, 167, 237,
273, 290
ālina (āylī), 237
āloka (of pradīpa), 86
alokanīya, 232
ālokād alamkſta, 374
āvaraṇa, § VIII (I-II)-2, 80, 201
āvilata, 359
āvști, 124, 315
kşiti-pratyupasthāna, 124
āveộika-dharma, (G III), 66, 112, 120
āvedha, 254
āśaya, 144, 370
āśraya, 21, 60, 289; (
BV, tad-ā.), 108,
112, 310, 323; (RG I) (= gotra), 24,
102, 130, 382
[ 416 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
āśraya, ~ & tad-parāvịtti, 130
(āśraya-parāvịtti, āśrayasya parāvșttiḥ],
41-44, 60, 187
āśrayaparivștti, (RG II) § XII-XIII,
28, 41-44, 46, 50, 60, 187, 310, 312, 401
āśrayaparivịtti-prāpti-naya, 118
āśv api, 343
āsanna-dūrī-bhāva, 220
ā samsāra-koteḥ, 157
ā samsārāt, 157
āspada, 112, 130, 376
āsrava-kşaya, 86, 92, 227
āsrava-kşaya-jñāna, 86, 227
I
icchantika (TG II-III, sattva 1), 39, 80,
82, 86, 202
icchā, 84, 222
itara-prādesika-jñāna, 176
ito-bāhya, 80, 203
indriya, 147
indriya [-parāpara-jñāna-bala] (bala 3),
120, 339
indhana, 228
iha, 204
iha-dhārmika, 80, 202
udaya (= abhisambodhi), 157
udāna, 285
udāra, 327
udāharaṇa, 14-17
udhāharaṇa-piņņârtha, IX, XV, XV
(comm.), 15, 16, 96, 122
udāharaṇa-samgraha, Š XVII-4, 128
uddāna, 12–13, 199, 338
uddiśat, 385
uddeśa, 258, 321
uddeśa-mukha, 145
unmīlya, 150
unmūlita, 225
upakāra, 248
upaklişța (citta), 37, 175
upaklesa, 72, 84, 216
upaygam, 297
upagūdha, 270
upacāra, 197
upaydā, 247
upadrava, 361
upanidhāya, 176
upanişad-gata, 177
upaneya, 104
upanyasana, 149
upapattim ca tușiteşu, 114, 329
upabhoga, 298
uparodha, 242
upalambha, 300
upavāsa, 358
upaśama, 212
upaśama-prabheda-pradeśa, 160
upaśānta, 68
upaśānti-pada, 162
upasamklesa, 278
upasarga, 241
upastambha, 124, 353
upaharaṇatā, 149
-upahita, 266
upātta, 209
upātteșu pañcasûpādāna-skandheșu, 209
upādāna, 82, 215, 244
-upādāya, 214
upāya, 102, 295
upāya-kausalya, 246
upāya-patita (sattva), 80, 203
upāya-vid (buddha), 116, 330
upāyāsa, 361
upekşâpratisamkhyā (āveņ. 6), 120, 341
ipsitam padam, 357
iryā-patha, 254, 357
U
ucchitti, 112, 321
ucchitti-pratyaya, 124
uccheda-dụsți, 219
ujjhita, 274
utkşālya, 150
uttama-yāna, 331
uttame yāne paripācana, 116
uttara-kāla(m), 299
uttara-kuru-dvipa, 190
uttaraṇa, 332
uttara-tantra, 106, 306
uttari-bhāvayitavya, 297
utpāda, 157
utsarga(-pādatā) (mahāp.), 344
utsukatā, 245
[ 417 ]



J. TAKASAKI
-upeta, 145
ubhayatâvikalpana(tā), 220
uşņa (of pradīpa), 86
uşņışa-śīrşa (mahāp. 26), 122, 346
U
ūrdhva-dehâvarta (roma) (mahāp.), 346
R
çddhi, 118, 332
çddhi-pāda, 118, 332
ſddhi-prātihārya, 124, 363
rşi (=buddha), 337
E
ekakşaņa-samāyukta (prajñā), 189
eka–jāti-pratibaddha (bodhisattva), 92, 255
eka-dhātu, 70, 170
eka-naya, 303
ekaputrakal-samjñā), 90
(ekayāna), 22, 28, 38
eka-rasa, 100
ekâgri (-bhavati), 302
ekânta, 189
ekânta-cārin (=pratyekabuddha), 349
ekaika-romôdbhava, 371
ekaika-viślişța (roma), 346
ekaikaviślişța-mțdûrdhvadeha-pradakși-
ņâvarta-sūkşma-roma (mahāp. 28),
122, 346
eņeya-janghatā (mahāp. 6), 122, 344
karuņā, 55, 68, 72, 118, 156, 200, 226;'
-bhāvanā, 80, 82, 86
karuņâtman, 375
karuņā-nişyanda, 116
karman, 70, 166, 238, 342;
(buddha-k.) (VP 7) (RG IV), XVI-
XVII, 23, 66, 124;
(TG IV), S VIII (III-IV)-5, 84, 199;
(BIV), XIII-IV), 108, 110, 311
karma-klesa, 88
karma-vipāka-jñāna-bala, 120, 338
karma-samkleśa, 82
kalala-mahābhūta-gata, 275
kalavinka-ruta (mahāp. 22), 122, 345
kalpa, 185
kalyāṇa, 100, 287
kāca, 151
kāma-dhātu, 98
kāmâvacara-devavimāna, 190
kāya, 323; (nāma-, pada-, vyañjana-k.),
182
kāya-guhyaka (K 8), 128, 375
kāya-dvaya, 319
~ ena pravịttiḥ, 180
kāra, 180
kāra-kriyā, 180
kāraṇā, 242
kāraṇânubhavana, 242
kārunya, 118, 156, 332
kālânatikramanatā, 361
kāluşya, 317
kimkaraṇīya, 245
kukçu, 275
kupyanti, 249
kumuda, 369
kusala-karma-patha, 364
kusala-dharma, 224
kusala-mula, 244
kusalamūla-samprayukta (klesa) § VIII
(IX b)-2, 90, 245
kuśala-sampad, 384
[kuſala-sampat-sattvânugraha], 132
kuśalôpasampadā, 384
křtya-kriyā, 306
křtya-sampādana, 253
křtyâsramsana, 116
křtrima, 307
kịpā (=karuņā), 68 (jñāna-~)
keśa-kambala, 151
ΑΙ
aišvaryam uttaram, 367
AU
audārika, 100, 285
audārya (sambhoga-kāya) (B VIB), 114, 313
aurasa,
209
K
kanguka-śāli-kodrava-yava-vrihi, 271
kathā-vastu, 146
kanaka-bimba, (TG 9, s. for dhātu), 96
kambu-grīvatyam amalam (mahāp. 14),
122, 345
[ 418 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
kaivalya, 114 (-tva), 122, 328
kola (-upama), 74, 182
klesa, 70, 110, 124, 158, 166; $ IX-1
(1-9), 96
klesa-karma-vipāka, 306
klesa-kosa, 268
klésa-duḥkhābhāva, 74
klesa-nirodha, 112
klesa-mala, 281
klesa-viſuddhi, 110
klesa-samklesa, 82
kleśâvaraṇa, 161
~ & jñeyâvaraṇa, 28, 108, 114, 124
klesavarana-prahāņa, 114
klesâvaraņa-visamyoga, 108
kleśêndhana-dahana, 86
kṣaṇika, 174
ksati, 387
kşaya, 218
kşānti, 130, 390
kșiti (= přthivi) → přthivi-tala
kşiti-pati (+ cakra-vartin)
kşudra-prāņaka, (TG 2, S. for klesa),
96
kşaudra (=madhu) (TG 2, s. for dhātu),
96
kşetra (apariśuddha), 116, 330
avabhāsa, 72
gati, 254, 291
gamana, 351
garbha (=tathāgata-garbha) (VP 4) (RG
I), 21, 37, 68, 275
garbha-kośa-mala, 100, 283
garbha-gata (dhātu), 36, 102, 290
garbha-veșțita, 269
garbha(-sthāna) (s. for samādhi), 80
garbhâvakramaņa, 116, 329
Vgarh, 387
gahana 363, 371
gahvara, 320
gāthā, 285
gāmbhīrya (svābhāvika) (B VI a), 114,
313
gãmbhiryaudārya-māhātmya, (B VI), 108,
311
guņa (= buddha-guņa, buddha-dharma),
(VP 6), (RG III), 23, 66, 118, 142;
& doşa), 88, 128, 233, 369; (5 g.)
1) 106; 2) 114
guņa-dharma, 303
guņa-nişpatti (caturākāra-g.
g.-sarva-
tā, -acintyatā, -aprameyatā, -viếuddhi-
paramatā), 94, 262
guņa-pāramitā, (TG III) § VIII (III-IV)
(4 -- śubha, ātma, sukha, nitya)
guņa-prakrti, 88
gunavat, 106, 150
guṇavattva, 130, 382
guņa-vibhāga, 148, 336
guru, 348
guhya, 265
gļhapati (for bodhisattva) (parable of)
§ VIII (IX b)-3, 90
geya, 285
gocara-visaya, 149
gotra (VP4) (RG I) (= dhātu) Ŝ VI-1
(ratnagotra), VII (tathāgata-gotra) (TG
c), IX-4 (gotra-svabhāva) (TG c) 21 ff.,
49, 76, 78, 84, 94, 100, 222, 259, 284;
(maņi-gotra), 150
gotra-svabhāva (TG c), 100
gotrâstitva (→ tathāgatagarbhâstitva)
godāvari-dvīpa (godānīya-dvīpa), 190
gospada (=goşpada), 254
grantha, 209
graha, 210, 331
KH
khaga (vyomny apracāraḥ khagaḥ), 366
khandikā, 151
khādy-asusamskſta, 271
khārôdaka, 150
G
gagana-gañjā (samādhi), 206
gangā-tīra-rajo 'tīta (buddha-dharma),
145
gangā-nadi-vālikā-vyatikrānta (buddha-
dharma), 145
gangā-nadī-vālikā-vyativịtta (buddha-
dharma), 145, 167
gangā-nadi-vālukā-vyativịtta (buddha-
dharma), 145
gargā-sikatâtivștta (guņa), 145
gaña (= samgha) (VP 3), 141
gama-samtāna, 178
[ 419 ]
28



J. TAKASAKI
J
GH
(for sāmbhogika), 116; - vat., 8 XVII
(VI), 128
ghatita, 299
cintitârtha, 196
ghafţita, 361
cihna, 347
ghoșa, 166
cetanā, 222
cetaḥ-paryāya, 363
cyavate (Vcyu), 243
C
cyutim tataḥ, 114, 329
cakra-vartin, (TG 8, s. for dhātu), 96, 102
cyuti-duḥkha, 367
cakrânka (-pădatā) (mahāp.), 344
carkramyamāna (iryā-patha), 357
CH
caturvidhâviparyāsa-saipjñā, 151
catur-vaiśāradya-prāpta (buddha), § XV
chanda, 222;
(II), 120, 339
(na ~ sya hānih) (āveņ 7), 120, 341
[catus-koţikā), 163, 166
chavi, 239
catuḥ-sukla, 84, 223
chidrâbhra, 104, 304
caraka, 203
caryā-pratipanna (bodhisattva), 92, 172,
255
cātaka, 365
jagac-charaṇya, 92
cātur-dvīpa, 190
jagat, 172
cāru-vaktra, 346
jagat-parispharana (karuņā), 110
citâmía, 344
jaghanya, 269
citta, 72, 76, 230 (-viparyāsa), 360 jathala, 269
citta-caitasika, 250
janman, 70, 116, 329
citta-nidhyāpana, 298
janma-samklesa, 82
citta-prakſti, (RG I), S VIII (VIII, IX), jambu-dvīpa, 190
22, 90, 100, 233, 236
jarā, 236
~ & ägantuka-klesa, 34, 59, 88, 90 jarā-maraņa, 82, 216
cittaprakſti-vaimalyadhātu, 233
jala-ruha, 270
citta-mano-vijñāna, 167
jātakāni, 116, 329
[citta-mātra], 35, 53, 59, 357
jāta-rūpa, 152
citta-viếuddhi, 236
jāti, 82, 216
citta-vyavadāna, 27, 96
jātya, 298
cittavyavadāna-dharma-sahajâvinirbhā- jāla, 266
gatā, 24, 96
jāla-pāņi-pădâvanaddhatā (mahāp. 3), 122,
cittavyavadāna-hetu (tathāgatadhātu), 100 344
citta-samkleša, 96
jina (=buddha), 22, 146
cittasamklesa-dharmâgantukatva, 96, jina-kriyā (VP 7) (RG IV), § XVI-XVII,
277
23, 76, 124
citta-samjñāpana, 295
jina-garbha (=tathāgata-garbha), 22, 229,
citta-samtāna, 191
402
cittasya prakſtiḥ, 236
jinatā, 342
cittâbhisaņskāra, 222
jinatva, 317
citra, 359
jñātſ, 90
citratā, 328
jñāna, 60, 68, 70, 72, 106, 118, 120, 156,
citra-lekhaka (parable of) § VIII (X)-3, 308; (=buddha-jñāna) 108;
263
(=āsravakşaya-j.) 227, (=tat-prstha-
cintāmaņi (s. for dharmakāya, TG a), 78; labdha, laukika-jñāna), 94;
[ 420 ]



The Ratnagotravibhāga
~ & karuņā, 92
jñāna-darśana, 266
jñānadarśana-áuddhi, 72, 177
jñāna-dehin (=dhimat), 323
jñāna-dhātu, 68, 154
jñānadhāty-āptiniştha, 23, 154
jñāna-niḥsști (K V), 128, 375
jñāna-pūrvamgama (karma) (āveņ. 13-15),
122, 342
jñānâpti, 23, 28, 60, 68, 154
jñānâlokalarkāra-sútra, § II-2, XVII
jñāpana, 120, 340
jñeya (-vastu), 120, 126
jõeyârtha, 371
jõeyåvaraṇa, 161
jñeyâvaraṇa-prahāņa, 114
jñeyâvaraņa-visamyoga, 108
jyeşțbi--putra, 149
T
tattva, 26
tattva-darśana, 70, 100, 169
tattvadarśana-vibandha, 70, 169
tat-prşthalabdha (jñāna), 30, 108, 110, 315
tathatā (TG b), 8, 24, 25, 28, 53, 78, 100,
198, 230, 287
samalā t. & nirmalā t., 24, 74, 287
tathatā-svabhāva (TG b) Ş IX-4, 100
tathatâvyatibhedatā, 100
tathatâvyatireka, 24, 229
tathāgata (=buddha) (VP 1) (TG IX c),
22, 76, 88, 94, 100, 231, 287, 395
tathāgata-karman, (RG IV), 76, 124
tathāgata-kula, 80
tathāgata-křtya-kriyā, 23, 124
tathāgata-garbha (VP 4) (RG I) § VII-XI
(TG a-c) § VII, IX-4, 8, 21 ff., 25,
30, 36, 37, 74, 90, 96, 100, 102, 104,
141, 143, 161, 187, 196, 198, 259, 286,
287, 288, 291, 292, 389, 400 (+ garbha).
tathāgata-garbha-śūnyatârtha-naya, 104,
299
vipranaşța-citta (pudgala), 109
tathāgatagarbha-sūtra, § VII, VIII, IX.
tathāgatagarbhâstitva, 72, 78, 102, 382
tathāgata-gotra (VP 4) (RG I) (TG c) $
IX-4, 22, 198, 288 (→ gotra)
tathāgatagotra-sambhava, 36
tathāgatagotra-sambhavârtha (TG c), 78,
198
tathāgatagotra-svabhāva, 288
tathāgata-jñāna, 76, 189
tathāgata-tathatā'vyatirekârtha (TGb), 78,
198
tathāgatatva, 266, 319
tathāgata-dharma (RG III), 145
tathāgata-dharmakāya (VP 5) (RG II), 76
tathāgata-dharmakāya-parispharaņârtha
(TG a), 78, 198
tathāgata-dhātu (VP 4) (RG I) & VIII-IX,
22, 102, 199, 230, 258, 290 (+ dhātu)
tathāgata-bodhi-jñāna, 98
tathāgata-mahākaruņā-vștti-hetu, 86, 226
tathāgata-śaraṇa-gata, 74
tathâgama, 94, 259
tad-āśrayaḥ (
BV) (= yoga), 108
tad-ubhayânabhilâșin, 80, 202
tapat, 369
tamas, 203
tamo-vidhamana-jñāna, 110
taruņa, 344
tarkâgocara, 70, 114
tala, 272
tādṛśa, 260
tārā-rūpa, 72
timira, 163
tişthat, 357
tirthika, 202
tirthya (TG II, sattva 2), 80, 82, 202
tīvra-rāga-dveșa-moha-paryavasthāna-
lakṣaṇa (klesa), 98, 278
tuşa (= bahistuşa), (TG 3, s. for klesa)
tușiteşv upapattiḥ, 116
tūrya, 360
tyājya, 74, 181
trayâvaraṇa-niḥsſta, 114, 327
trikāya, 108, 116
tri-jñāna (=śruti-cintā-bhāvanāmaya-j.),
112, 323
tridaseśvara, 356
tri-dhātu-samkleśa-nibarhaņa, 132
tridhā-vimukta, 114, 325
tri-bhava, 82, 215
tri-bhuvana, 381
tri-bhūmigata-mala, 100
tri-mandala-parisuddhi, 151, 383
trimaņdalâvikalpa, 130
[ 421 ]



J. TAKASAKI
tri-ratna-vamsa, 193
~ anupaccetſ, 193
triratnôtpatty-anurūpa-hetu, 147
trividdha-svabhāva (of TG) S IX-4, 108,
198, 283, 284
trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu, 190
(tri-svabhāva] (parikalpitâdi), 41, 48, 58
traidhātuka, 290
- pratibimbaka (manomayakāya), 92
traiyāṇika-gana, 74
try-adhvan, 342
tryadhva-jñāna (āveņ. 16–18), 122, 342
tryadhvânubaddha, 193
tvak-kośa, (bīja-tvak) (TG 6), 96
tvan-mdịu-sri-taruņatā (mahāp. 4), 122,
344
dūşya,
Ꭰ .
daka-candra (=ambu-candra) (G IV), 122,
347
dakacandra-vat (buddha), $ XV (IV), 124
dakṣiṇiya, 152
dagdha-pūrva, 236
darśana, 116, 387; (K I), 128, 375
darśana-prahātavya (klesa), 98, 278
darśana-mārga, 158, 167
darśana-heya (-vyāvſtti), 100
darśanā, f. (?), 128, 375
darśanâdi-navadhôrtha, § XVII-3, 128
darśanā-desanā-pļavrtti-krama, 128
daśa-pāramitā, 232
daśa-bala § XV (I), 120
daśa-bhūmi, 150; (for niryāņa), 124
daśa-bhūmi-sthita-bodhisattva, 104
dāna, 130
dāridrya-vinivartana(tā), 110
dina-kợt, 370
divaukas, 356
divyā-cakṣus (=cyuty-upapatti-jñāna-
bala) (bala 9), 120, 339
dāpti, 94
dīrghângulikatā (mahāp. 2), 122, 344
dundubhi, 355
durgrhita-grāhin, 203
durbhaga, 372
durlabhatva (K VI), 128
durlabha-prāpata-bhāva (tathāgata),
§ XVIII-2 (VI), 128
durlabhôtpāda-bhāva (of ratna), 74, 185
durlabhôdaya, 130
duḥkha, 70, 126, 158, 367
(duḥkha, -hetu, -nirodha, mārga),
126
duḥkha-cārikā, 116, 330
duḥkha-nirodha, 70, 84
duḥkha-nirvit, 84
duḥkha-bhirutva, 80, 205
duḥkha-samjñā, 82, 205
duḥkhâgni-praśamana § XVIII-2 (III),
124
dūramgamā (bhūmi), 92, 255
263
dȚă-mārga-bhāvanā (=darśana-bhāvanā-
mārga), 278
dỊdha, 348
dşdha-karuņâdhyāśaya, 80
dỊdhâdhyāśaya, 252
dịşța-satya (= tattva-darbin), 229
dịşțānta, 128
dịşti, 280 (-viparyāsa)
deva-dundubhi (K II), 126
devadundubhi-vat, § XVII-2 (II), 126
deśa-kāla-gamana, 174, 351
deśana (nt.), 116, 328
deśanā, (K II), 128, 375
desanā-dharma, 74, 100, 182, 285
[deśanā-naya], 285
deśanā-prayojana, § XI, 47, 106, 305
deśanī, 254
dehin, 197
doşa (TG VIII a), 88, 233; (5 doşa), 104
dosa (=dveşa), 163
doşâgantukatā, 88
daurgandhya-vāsanā, 216
dravya, 318
dvaya, 70, 166
dvaya-graha-vimukti, 118
dvātrimśan-mahāpuruşa-lakṣaṇa-rupa-
dhārin (buddha), § XV (IV), 122, 343
dvādaśa-bhavânga, 167
dvidhā darśanam, 338
dvi-pada, 180
dvipadâgrâdhipatya, 110, 318
dvisāhasra-lokadhātu, 190
dvīpâgrâdhipa, 269
dveșa, 70, 98, 110, 169
dveşânuśaya-lakaşaņa (klesa), 98, 278
[ 422 ]



The Ratnag otra vibhāga
DH
dharma, 21, 171, 205, 223 (= yāna), 314;
(VP 2), 66, 68, 74, 142; (= guņa) (VP
6) (RG III) 23, 68, 118, 235, 292
dharma-kāya, 22, 26, 56, 405; (VP 2)
dharma), 70, 74, 94, 144; (VP 5)
(RG II) (āśrayaparivșttilakşaņa - ~),
106, 108, 126, 184, 225, 320; (TG a)
§ IX-4, 25, 78, 100, 104, 198
~ sya sodhanam, 112
~& (vi-)muktikāya, 30, 110, 320
~ & rūpakāya, 28 ff., 116, 118, 120,
124
dharmakāya-garbha, 292, 303
dharmakāya-prāpti, 110
~ -hetu, 70
dharmakāya-parispharaṇatā, 27
dharmakāya-viſuddhibetu, 86, 226
dharmakāya-svabhāva (TG a), 100
dharma-kārakriyā, 72
dharma-kșati-phala, § XVIII-4, 132
dharma-kṣati-hetu, § XVIII-4, 132
dharma-cakra (-pravștti), 116, 330
dharmacakra-pravarta, 68
dharma-tattva, 299, 331
- prakāśana, 116
dharmatā, 26, 102, 234, 268, 294, 295, 343
dharmatā-gahvaratva, 112, 323
dharmată-nişyanda, 22, 31, 155
dharmatva, 266
dharma-divākara, 70
dharma-dundubhi, 126
dharma-dvişa-sevana, 132
dharma-dhātu, 8, 29, 30, 39, 72, 100, 160,
161, 192, 284, 290, 370
dharmadhātu-kriyā, 76 193
dharmadhātu-garbha, 104, 291, 303
dharmadhātu-nişyanda, 31, 285
dharmadhātu-parama, 82
[dharmadhātu-visuddhi], 403
dharmadhātu-samanvāgama, 86
dharmadhātu-svabhāva, 114, 325
-dharman, 144, 166, 224
dharma-pada, 385
dharma-parameśvara, 262
dharma-paryāya, 149
~ - mukha, 231
dharma-bhāņakatva, 10, 147, 389
dharma-bhịt, 388
dharmabhrd-āra, 132
dharma-meghā (bhūmi), 92, 94, 255
dharma-ratna (VP 2), § II, 22, 70
-guņavibhāga, 66
-ātmabhāva, 110
dharma-rāja-jyeșța-putra, 149
dharmarāja-putra, 80
dharma-vithapanā, 248
dharma-skandha, 232
dharma-sthititā, 114
dharmâkānkṣin, 366
dharmâkhyāna-naya, 276
dharmadhimukti (TG II, hetu 1), 46, 56,
200
dharmāņām dharmatā, 36, 102, 196, 294
dharmârthavāda, 132, 390
dharmâloka-mukha, 239
dharmêśvara, 271
dharmaiśvarya, 118, 214
dhātu, 21, 23, 225 (= hetu), 290 (= hetu);
(VP 4) (RG I), 66, 70, 74, 88, 96, 102,
104, 141, 142, 187, 225, 235, 238, 244,
290, 295, 325; (bala 4), 120, 339, 352
dhātrī (s. for karuņā), 80
dhāraṇī, 365
dhāraṇīśvararāja (sūtra), (dhāraṇirājasūtra)
§ 1-3, 146
dhi (= prajñā), 175, 375
dhimat (=bodhisattva), 146, 308
dhī-māndya, 132
dhira (dhimat), 322
dhyāna, 130, 252, 322; (catur-), 252, 379
dhyāna-vāry-abhişyandana, 110
dhyānâdi-kleśa-vaimalya (bala 7), 120, 339
dhruva, 74, 108, 112, 167, 257
dhruva-dharma, 224, 268
N
nagara (parable of), § VIII (IX b)-6, 92,
231
nabhas (s. for tathatā), 78
nabhas-tala, 304
naya, 320; (= mārga), 339; (= yāna), 182
naya-mukha (-ena), 219, 261
nava-candra-vat, 72
nava-yāna-samprasthita (bodhisattva),
104, 296
nāga-kośavad-vasti-guhyatā (mahāp. 7),
344
122,
[ 423 ]



J. TAKASAKI
nänātva-samjñită (na ~)(äveņ. 5), 120, 341 nirdainya, 122, 348
nāma-paryāya, 259
nirdosa, 106
nāma-rūpa, 158
nirnānā-karaņa, 76, 193
nāyaka, 380
nirbhayatva, 122
nārakâgni (s. for vyādhi), 90
nirmamī-karana, 242
nārāyaṇa-sthāma-dỊdhâtmabhāva (mabāp. nirmala, 74
31), 122, 346
nirmalā tathatā (VP 5, RG II), § XII-XIII,
nāśa, 321
23, 76, 106, 187, 310
nitya, 84, 108, 167, 208, 257, 321; (B VII), nirmāņa (-kāya), 102, 289
§. XIII (VII), 108, 116, 311
niryāņa (=yāna), 124, 353
~, dhruva, siva, śāśvata, 38, 39, 74, nirvāņa, 27, 84, 94, 116, 250, 258, 261
92, 114, 167, 257
~ & samsāra, 27, 84, 92, 116, 118
nitya-pāramitā, 82, 84, 209
nirvāņa-gotra, 86
nitya-samjñā, 82, 208
nirvāņa-dhātu, 144, 290
nidāna, 21, 243, 285, 325
nirvāņâdhigama, 102
nidāna-parivarta, 146
nirvāṇâdhigama-kriyā, 116, 330
nidhāna (s. for sattva, XVI), 21, 124, 354 nirvikalpatā, 70
nidhi (=nidhāna), (TG 5) (s. for dhātu, nirvi işğam, 352
prakſtistha-gotra), 102, 318, 352
nirvịjya, 266
nidhyāna, 389
nirvști (= nirvāņa), 221
nipāta, 370
nirvștiḥ paramā, 326
nimitta, 170, 171
nirvedhika(tva) (
GI), 122, 348
nimitta-grāhin, 170
niryhan, 270
nimitta-bhūtatva, 112
nivaraña, 270
nimitta-varjita (tathāgata), 320
nivartya, 331
nimittârambaņa, 170, 171
nivāsânusmrti (bala 8), 120, 339
nimnonnata, 373
niśchidra, 264
niyata-gotra-svabhāva, 294
niśraya, 102, 292
niyata-rāśi, 161
nişaņņa, 357
niyama, 358
nişevya, 126, 367
niranukrosa, 178
nişkalpa, 164
nirantara-citâmśatā (mahāp. 9), 122, 344 nişkimcana, 373
nirapekșa-pravịtti & XVII-2 (III), 126, 365 nişkaivalya, 348
niravajñā, 106
niştha, 184
niravajya, 308, 389
nişthā (-guņa) (TG VIII c), 88, 233
niravaćeşa-yogena, 294
nişthā-gata, 262
nirātmatā, 248
nișthāgata-bodhisattva, 92
nirālamba, 373
nişthāgatabodhisattva-sāmtānika, 98
nirāstha, 120, 341
nişthāgamana, 213
nirāsthatva, 122
nișthâdhigama-paryavasāna, 184
nirība (G IV), 122, 348
nișpatti, 262
nirīhaka, 357
nişpădya, 351
nirukti, 166
nişyanda, 31, 284, 328
niruttara-tathāgata-karman, 66
nişyanda-phala, 31
nirodha-mārga-satya, 165
niḥśrayena, 222
nirodha-satya Ş III-3, 70, 74, 114, 165 niḥśritya, 221
nirodhâpti (vaiś. 4), 120, 340
niḥsamklesa-visuddhi, 76
nirgranthi-putra, 203
niḥsaraņa, 182
nirdesa, 258
niħsarana-paryeşin, 74
[ 424 )



The Ratna gotravibhāga
(niņsvabhāvatā], 58
nica, 307
nica-citta, 106
nīta, 386
(nitârtha], 285
nīti, 386
nīlôtpalasri-vşşapakşma-netra (mahāp. 24),
122, 346
nộpatva, 269
netrī, 151
neyârtha, 285, 387
neyârtha-tattva-graha, 132
nairātmya, 211, 308
nairātmya-koţi, 72, 174
nairātmya-prapañca (-vigama), 84
nairmalya, 78
nairmāṇika (kāya), § XIII (VI c), 29, 102,
114, 116, 324
nairyāņikatva, 126
naiskramya, 116, 330
naiḥsvābhāvya, 118, 332
nyagrodha (+ vặkșa)
nyagrodha-pūrņa-druma-maņdalâbha (ma-
hāp. 30), 122, 346
paramârtha-darsin (= sarvadarsin,
sarvajña), 186
paramârtha-dhātu (= tathậgata-dhātu),
199
paramârtha-lakṣaṇa, 112, 322
paramârtha-satya, 26, 100, 285
parampara, 260
parârtha-sampatti, 29, 108, 112
parârthasampatty-adhiſthāna, 120
parârtha-sampad, 68, 156, 162
parāvịtti, 130, 382
parikarma-kệta, 252
parikarman, 150, 324
parikalpita (or parikalpa), 292
parikīrtana, 148
parigaveşayat, 171
parigraha, 21, 124, 245, 257, 353
parigrahaņa, 253
paricchādita, 224
parijaya, 252
parijñātāvin, 288
parinirvāṇa, 104
paripantha, § VIII (III-IV)-3, 82, 214
paripāka, 245
parimārgaņā, 222
parivịtti, 187
parivrājaka, 203
pariśrānta, 262
parisuddhi, 130, 383
parişat, 148
parispharaṇa, 294
parispharaṇatā, 371
paruşa, 322
parușa-sparśa-rahita, 114
-paryanta, 254
paryanta-kāla, 184
paryanta-kāla-saraņa, 74, 184
paryavadāpana, 150
paryavasāna, 182
paryavasthāna, 277
paryāya, 193, 295
paryāpanna, 263
paryutthāna (=paryavasthāna), 100, 169
paryești-duḥkha, 367
pavitra (tā), 110, 318
parşad-gaña, 348
paligodha (→ phaligodha), 213
pātāla-stha, 372
pāpa-suhrd, 388
P
panca upādāna-skandhāḥ, 209
pattra, 270
patthara-cuņņa (= prastara-cūrņa), 66
pada (= sthāna, aspada), 21, 74, 112,
142, 319, 371
padârtha, 310
padma-(kośa), (TG I, s. for klesa), 96, 98
para-cakra, 361
parataḥ, 195
para-pārami-prāpta, 210
para-pratyaya-sambhava, 128
parama-tattva-jñāna-vişaya, 199
parama-dharmaiśvarya, 214
parama-nirvāṇa (TG X), 94, 114
parama-bodhi, 124
parama-viśuddha-dharmatā, 231
parama-śūnyatârtha, 104
paramâņu, 190
paramâtman, 84
paramârtha, 112, 118, 258
paramârtha-kāya, 120
~& samvști-kāya, 29, 120
paramârthakāyatā, 336
[ 425 ]



J. TAKASAKI
pāramārthika(m vapuḥ) (= paramārtha- praklinna, 269
kāya), 120
-prakhyā, 283
pāramārthika (buddha), 184
praghoșa, 363
pāramārthika-saraņa, 74
prajñapta, 120
pārami-gata, 381
prajñā, 27, 76, 106, 308;
pāramită (șaț) XVIII-1, 94
(ekakşaņa-samāyukta -), 189;
piņdârtha, 234
(= prajñā-pāramitā-bhāvanā), 80, 84, 86
pitſ (s. for bodhisattva), 90
(= avikalpajñāna), 94, 106
punya, 352, 381
& karuņā, 55, 84
punya-jñāna-sambhāra, 178
~ & jñāna, 55, 57, 94, 106
punya-pāramitā, 130, 383
nāsti prajñayā hāniḥ (āveņ. 10), 120, 341
puộya-sambhāra, 245
prajñā-pāramitā, 27, 130, 207
puạyapti, 132
prajnāpāramitā-bhāvanā (TG II, hetu 2),
pudgala-dịşti, 80, 203
80, 82, 86, 205
pudgala-dharmakhya (jagat), 72, 174 praạidhi, 84, 222
pudgala-dharmâvināśatva, 72
praộihita-manas, 358
punar-bhava, 183
pramudana, 360
purojava, 342
pratapati, 370
pūti, 112, 269, 321
pratārayati, 330
pūtivastra (TG 7, s. for klesa), 96, 100 pratikſti, 263
pūri, 130, 383
pratigha, 201
pūrņa-candra, 110
pratighâkāra, 70, 169
pūrņa-vimalêndu, 317
pratijñā, 128
pūrva-videha-dvipa, 190
pratipakşa, § VIII (I-II)-2, 80, 171, 205
prthag-jana (TG VI a), 86, 98, 104, 231
pratipakşatā, 70, 165
přthagjana-saikşa-sāņtānika, 98
pratipad, 363
pộthivi (K IX), 128, 130
pratipanna, 204, 254
přthivi-dhātu, 290
pratipannaka, 74, 183
přthivi-tala (TG 5, s. for klesa)
pratibaddha, 256
přthivi-vat, ſ XVII (IX), 128
pratibādhana, 386
prşpha-labdha (jñāna), 94, 266
pratibimba, 124, 289
poşa (= puruşa), 178
pratibimbaka, 250
poşin, 178
pratibhā, 385
paurvâparyeņa, 189
pratibhāna, 149
prakalpayati, 248
pratirūpaka, 179
prakſtârtha, 128, 375
pratiroma-krama, 210
prakſti, 21; (= citta-prakſti) 88, 236, 239 prativarņika, 185
prakſti-citta-jñāna, 76
pratividhya, 172, 253
prakſti-parisuddha-dharma-garbha, 104, prativedha, 72, 142, 218
291, 303
pratiśaraṇa, 295
prakřti-parisuddhi, 78
pratiśruti (K YII), 128, 355
prakřti-prabhāsvara (citta), 90, 108, 188 pratiśrutka-sabdavat, $ XVII-2 (VII), 128
prakſti-prabhāsyaratā, 72, 174
pratiśrutya, 263
prakſti-viśuddhi, 108, 112, 315
pratişthā, 102, 292
prakſti-áuddhi84
prati-samydbā, 264
~ & vaimalya-suddhi, 84, 108
pratisarati, 300
prakſtistha (gotra), 102, 288
pratisevya, 388
~ & samudānīta, 30, 102, 288
pratisvam, 187
prakſty-asaņklişța, 22, 200
pratitya-dharma, 181
[ 426 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
(pratītya-samutpāda), 26, 181, 188
pratyaya, 195
pratyaya-lakṣaṇa (paripantha), 82, 214
pratyaya-sambhava, 130
pratyātmam, 156, 176
pratyātma-lokottara-jñānadarśana, 72
pratyātma-vedanīya, 26, 70, 142, 163
pratyātma-vedita, 326
pratyātma-vedya, 163
pratyātmâdhigama-dharma, 100, 285
pratyupasthāna, 221, 227, 354
pratyekabuddha (TG II-III, sattva 4),
80, 82, 104
pratyekabuddha-yānika, 72, 80, 90
prathama, 280
prathama-cittôtpādika (bodhisattva), 92,
178, 255
prathama-lokottara-dharma-darśana-
jñāna, 98
pradakşiņâvartá, 346
pradīpa (s. for TG V, 2), 86
pradeśa, 160
prapañca, 84, 157
prapañcayati, 159
prapācana-vyākarañe nidānam, 116
prabandha, 246
prabhava, 285
prabhā, 74; (s. for prajñā), 94, 185
prabhākara, 385
prabhā-maņdala-vićeşaņa, XVII-2 (V)
prabhāva, 331; (svabhāva) (TG a), 78, 201
prabhāva-sampatti, 116
prabhāvita, 290, 314, 355
prabhāsvara, 86, 248
prabhāsvaram visuddham ca, 114, 327
prabhūta-jihvatā (mahāp. 20), 122, 345
pramathana, 360
pramāṇataḥ, 193
pramāņi-křtya, 294
pramuditā (bhūmi), 92, 254
pramokşa-citta, 249
prayoga, 204, 220, 226
pralambha-bāhutā (mahāp. 12), 122, 345
pravacana, 198, 401
pravicaya-jñāna, 314
pravịtti (=vịtti) (TG VI), § VIII (VI);
(B VI), § XIII (VI), 226, 230
praśama-pura (= nirvāṇa), 369
praśuddha, 179
prasanna, 365
prasava, 381
prasādhita, 298
praskhalita (= skhalita), 342
prahāṇa, 108, 228
prahāra, 276
prākṣta, 242
prākſtâgni (s. for jarā), 90
prāņi-gaņa (= kşudra-prāņaka)
prātihārya, 126, 357
prātihārya-traya, 362
prādurbhāva, 242
prādesika–jñāna, 72, 178
prādesikatva, 361
prādesika-saraņa, 74
prāpta-nirvāṇa-samjñin, 330
prāptaḥ sarvakālam, 234
prāpti (B II) (= prāpty-upāya), 108, 310,
312; (K IX), 128, 375
prāpty-upāya (B II), 108, 312, 314
prāpana, 120
prāptavya, 120
prāpya, 367
prārthanā, 84, 222
prāsāda, 356
preta, 366
protsāba, 106, 308
PH
phala, 102, 124;
(TG III), § VIII (III-IV), 82, 199;
(B III), § XIII (III), 108, 311
phala-tvak (→ tvak-kośa)
phala-věkşa (→ vệkşa)
phala-samanvāgama, § VIII (V)-2, 86, 227
phaligodha, 213
phalgu, 110, 318
~ -vyapagama(tā), 110
B
bala (G I), 66, 120
balânvita (buddha), § XV (I), 120, 338
bahis-tuşa (TG 3, s. for klesa), 96, 98
bāla-pěthagjana, 104
bāla-sārthâtivāhana, 116
bibharti, 179
bimba (=nirmāņa-kāya), 326
bīja, 21; (s. for adhimukti), 80
[ 427 ]
29



J. TAKASAKI
bodhi-citta, 45, 59, 106, 307, 383
bodhi-manda, 147, 370
bodhimaņdāvakrānti, 116
bodhimaņdôpasamkrānti, 330
bodhi-sattva, ş IV-3', VIII (I-II)-2, VIII
(IX b)-6, -7, 72, 80, 84, 88, 90, 98, 104,
231, 353
bodhisattva-karman, 66, 152
bodhisattva-pițaka, 100, 285
bodhisattva-bhūmi, S VIII (IXb)–7, (X)-3.
bodhisattva-mabākaruņā, 66, 152
bodhisattva-yānika, 72, 80, 180
bodhisattva-samgha, § IV-3, 72
bodhisattvalamkāra, 66, 152
bodhisattvâbhāsa, 66, 152
bodheḥ sattvaḥ, 353
bodhya (RG I), 24, 76, 194
bodhy-anga (RG III), 24, 76, 194, 252
bodhy-āpti, 132
bauddha gotra, 78, 197
brahman (= mahā-brahman. m) (K IV),
128, 331, 355
[~ & ātman), 21
brahma-syaratā (mahāp. 23), 122, 345
bījankura (TG 6, s. for dhātu, samudānita-
gotra), 96
buddha (VP 1), 22, 66, 68, 74, 142; (TG
VII, IXc), 88, 92;
(= buddha-bimba) (TG 1, s. for dbātu),
96, 100, 110
buddha-kāya (-traya), § IX-4, XIII (VI)
102
buddha-kāra-kriyā, 72
buddha-kſtya (RV IV), 24, 130
buddha-kriyā (RG IV), 24, 128
buddha-garbha (= tathāgata-garbha), 22
buddha-guņa (VP 6) (RG III), 76, 118,
130, 336
buddha-gotra, 22, 48 (→ bauddha gotra)
buddha-jñāna (TG a), 28, 29, 35, 78, 197
-antargama(tva), 27, 197
buddha-jñāna-samudāgama-hetu, 86, 226
buddhatā, 106, 309
buddhatva, 23; § VIII (X)-2, 94, 96,
100, 102, 124, 261;
(= bodhi) (RG II), XIII (I-II), 106,
108, 310, 352
buddha-duşțâśaya, 388
buddha-dharma (RG III), 24, 118
buddha-dharmâvinirbhāga (dharma-
kāya), 94
buddha-dhātu (VP 4) (RG I), 22, 23, 24,
66, 104, 130, 235, 305
~astitva, XI, 50, 106
buddha-bimba, (TG 1, s. for dhātu)
(→ buddha)
buddha-bodhi (VP 5) (RG II), 130
buddha-bhāva, 180
buddha-bhūmi, 92, 94, 98, 128, 313, 376
~-ekacarama-janma-pratibaddha (bo-
dhisattva), 256
buddha-maņdala, 124
buddha-ratna (VP 1), § II, 22, 68
-guņavibhāga, 66
buddha-vișaya, 128
buddha-sarana, V-3, 72
[buddha-lakşaņa], 404
buddha-sāņtānika, 266
buddhi, 380
boddhavya, 194
bodhana (RG IV), 24, 76, 194
bodhi (VP 5) (RG II), § XII-XIII, 24, 66,
76, 106, 141, 142
BH
bhanga, 157
bhaya-samjñā, 74
bhava, 243
bhavâbhilāşin, 80, 202
bhavana, 191
bhava-nirvāņa-dvayagraha-vimukti, 118
bhava-śānty-anudgraha, 334
bhavâgra, 376
bhavāḥ (=tri-bhava), 158
bhavya, 360, 368
bhavyatā, 224, 382
bhājana-loka, 239
bhājana-vimātratā, § XVII-2 (III), 126
bhāti muktam, 316
bhānu, 371
bhāva, 299, 372
bhāvanā, 130
bhāvanā-jñāna-heya, 100
bhāvanā-prabātavya (-klesa), 98, 278
bhāvanā-mārga, 158, 168
bhāva-vināśa, 299
bhāvita, 357
bhāskara, 384
[ 428 )



The Ratnagotravibhā ga
bhū (= přthivi), 357
bhūta, 171
bhūta-koți, 306
bhūta-dharma, 106
bhūtadharmâpavāda, 106, 305
bhūmi, 172
(daśa-) § VIII (IX b)-7, 92, 255
bhūmy-avacara-devavimāna, 190
bheda, 386
bheri, 362
bhoga, 381
bhramara, 98
bhramara-prāņin, 282
M
maņi-gotra, 150
maņi-ratna, 355, 372
mapdanaka, 298
mandala, 148; (of arka, s. for cittaprakřti),
94
maņdalaka, 287
madhu, (TG 2, s. for dhātu), 100, 271
madhyastha, 358
manas (= citta prakſti), 276
manasi-kāra 169
manāpa, 246
mano (-guhyaka) (K VI), 128, 375
mano-maya-kāya, 92, 98, 197, 279, 359
manomaya-kāya-trayaḥ, 100
manomaya-skandha, 84, 217
manomayâtmabhāva (=manomayakāya),
82, 84, 215
mano-rama, 262
mano-rūpa, 359
mama-kāra, 104, 297
mala-vigamatā, 114
mala-hara, 368
maharşi (=bodhisattva), 11, 335
mahā-karuņā, 90, 153, 308
mahākaruņā-bhāvanā (TG II, hetu 4), 80,
206, 251
mahā-cakra-vāla, 190
mahâtman (= buddha), 283
mahā-dharmadhirāja, 289
mahā-purușa-lakṣaṇa (G IV), 120, 122
mahā-pusta (parable of), § VI-1 (III), 189
mahā-prthivi, 190
mahā-bodhi-karuņā, 66
mahābrahmavat, XVII-2 (IV), 126
mahā-maitrī, 106
mahāyāna-dharma-pratigha, 80, 205
mahāyāna-samprasthita, 80
mahāyāna-dharmadhimukti-bhāvanā (TG
II, hetu 1), 80, 205
mahârya-saddharma-rasâgra-vindana, 112
mahā-vaişajya-rasa, 151
mahā-samudra, 190
mahi-ruha, 373
mahendra-nīlamala-ratna-keśa (mahāp.
29), 122, 346
mahôdadhi, 124
mātſ (s. for prajñā), 80; (for śrāvaka-
yānika), 90
mātsarya (-ādi), 264
māyā-nirmita, 306
māra-pramathana, 369
māra-sainya-pramadana, 116, 330
mārga, 74
mārga-satya, § III-4, 70, 74, 165
mārgaḥ sarvatra-gāmini (bala 6), 120, 339
mārgâkhyāna (vais. 3), 120, 340
mārşāḥ, 239
māhātmya (B VI, c), 114; (K), 126, 313,
355
māhendra-marutā, 358
(mithyā)darśana, 132
mithyātva-niyataḥ sattva-rāśiḥ, 80, 205
mithyā-niyata-rāśi, 161
mithyâbhimānâśraya, 132
midha-kūpa, 191
mīmāmsā, 191
mukta-jñāna, 292
muktā, 369
mukti-kāya (=vimukti-kāya), 30, 320
mukhâvadāna, 230
muni, 74, 184
muni-prabhākara, 132
muni-pati (=buddha), 358
muni-vșşa (= buddha), 317
mușitatā, 342
mușitā smộti (nāsti ~) (āveņ. 3), 120, 341
mūrdhnā, 386
mūla, 21
mūla-paricchinna, 241
mūla-parisuddha, 80
mşgêndra-hanutā (mahāp. 15), 122, 345
một-panka-lepa (TG 9, 8. for klesa), 96,
100, 276
[ 429 ]



J. TAKASAKI
mrtyu, 236
mộtyu-mārâvabhanga, 118
mộtyu-vyādhi-jarā (-agni), 90
mşdu-karmaṇya-bhāva, 114, 324
mşļā-moşa-dharmin, 74, 182
megha (K III), 126, 355
meghavat, § XVII-2 (III), 126
meghâdivat (šūnya), 106
maitrī, 308
mokşa-märga-pratihatâśa, 80
moșa-dharma, 74, 181
moha, 70, 110, 169
mobânda-kośa, 98
mohânuśaya-lakşaņa (-klesa), 98, 278
Y
ratna-guna-vibhāga, 141
ratna-gotra § VI-XVIII, VI (4 aspects),
20 f, 76, 141
ratna-gotra-vibhāga, 20
ratna-traya, § II-V, 21
ratna (dārikā) sūtra, § XV, 347
ratna-nidhi (+ nidhi), 96
ratna-vigraha (TG VII, s. for dhātu), (=r.-
bimba, r.-ākſti), 96, 102
ratna-svagarbha, 352
ratnâkara, 225
rava, 120
ravi, 124
ravita, 166; (nāsti ravitam) (āveņ. 2), 120,
341
raśmi (arka-r.) (s. for jñāna), 94
rāga, 70, 110, 169
rāga-rati, 98
rāgâdi-carita-sattva-sāņtānika, 98
rāgânuśaya-lakşaņa (-klesa), 98, 278
rāśi, 197
rāhu, 110, 316
ruta, 166
rūpa, 328
rūpa-kāya, 29, 112, 116, 118, 122, 254, 331
rūpa-kāya-dvaya (see dharmakāya)
rūpa-gata, 233
rūpa-ratnâkſti, 110
rūpâdikam vastu, 208
rūpârūpya-dhātu, 98
rūpâvacara-deva-vimāna, 190
rūpin, 343
yathā (ca tat) (B VIII), 108, 311
yatha-drşta, 280
yathā-dịşța-lokottaradharma-bhāvanā-
jñāna, 98
yathâbhiprâya-pūri(tva), 116
yathābhūta-jñāna, 211
yathābhūta-darsana, 303
yathābhūta-yonisomanasikāra, 249
yathârhataḥ, 370
yathāvat, 173, 229
yathāvad-bhāvikatā, ş IV-1, a), 72, 173,
174, 311
yathā vaineyikeșu, 76, 285
yathāśayeşu, 76
yāna (→ niryāņa), 124
yāvat, 173
yāvat kālam (B VII), 108, 311
yāvad-bhāvikatā, § IV-1, b), 72, 173,
311
yukti, 102, 295, 384
yugapad-gocara-sthāna, 372
yugânta-agni) (s. for mệtyu), 90
yoga, 102, 145, 295; (TG V) S VIII (V), 86,
196, 225; (B V) Ş XIII (V), 108, 112, 311
yoga-vid, 376
yogin, 325
yoni, 21, 186
L
175,
lakşaņa, 412;
(5 lakṣaṇāḥ) (of svābhāvika), 114
lakṣaṇa-prayoga, 227
lakşaņa-vyañjana, 357
lina-citta, 106, 305
loka-dharma, 118, 185, 333
loka-dhātu, 290, 363
loka-nātha, 118, 332
loka-vid (buddha), 116, 329
loka-vyavahāra, 242
lokâlankāra, 74
lokottara-jñāna, 72, 98
lokottara-dharmakāya-prakſti-parisuddhi,
104
lokottara-dharma-garbha, 109, 291, 303
R
ranga-vikſtim upaiti, 387
rati-krida, 368
ratna, § 7-4, 74; (of mahodadhi), 86
[ 430 ]



The Ratnagotra vibhāga
lokottara-prajñā, 94, 175
lokottara-buddha-dharmāḥ (daśabalâdi), 76
lodyeta (Vlud), 249
lobha-gredhatā, 132, 387
laukika (-jñāna), 312
laukika-vītarāga-sāņtānika, 98
V
vamsa, 21
vacas, 385
vajra, 142
vajra-pada, § 1-1, 23, 66, 141, 142, 389
vajravat, XV (I), 120, 122
vajrâgni, 366
vajrôpama-samādhi, 280
vajropama-samādhi-jñāna, 98
vadhaka-puruşa, 183
vadhya, 279
vara, 263
varņa (of pradīpa) (s. for āsravakşaya), 86
vasitā, 178
vasitā-prāpta-bodhisattva, 82, 214
vasudhā, 100
vasudhântarita, 282
vāk-patha, 166
vāg-guhyaka (K VII), 128, 375
vāta-maņdala, 238
vāyu (s. for karuņā), 124; (for ayoniśo-
manasikāra), 88, 238
vāri (s. for TG c), 78; (for karuņā-vștti-
hetu), 86; (for karma-klesa), 88
vāsanā, 74, 114 (~ ucсhitti); (= avidyā-
vāsabhūmi), 277
vāsanânusandhi, 147
vāsa-bhūmi, 215
vikāra, 241
vikalpa, 70, 157, 166
vikurvita, 369
vikști, 112, 321; (K IV), 128, 375
vikrama-stha, 120, 341
vikrama-sampad, 124
vikrīditā (karuņā), 68, 161
vigraha, 325
vicālya, 386
vicitra-rasa, 100
vicitra-dharma-sambhoga, 116
vijñapti, 285, 373
(vijñapti-matratā], 8, 59
vițapa (dharma-v.), 274
vițhapeti, 159
vițhapyante, 248
vidyā, 267
vivdhā, 274
vidhi, 340
vidhura, 297
vinaya-kriyā, 124, 351
vinayâbhyupāya, 124
vinivịtta, 244
vinirbhāgadharma, 292
[viniscaya], 407
vinihatya, 270
vinīti-kriyā, 352
vineya-dhātu, 124, 351
vineyâdri, 370
vindana, 320
vipakşa, 164, 383
viparīta, 385
viparyaya, 208
viparyasta, 86, 230
viparyasta-samjñā, 104
viparyāsa, 82, 208
viparyāsâbhirata, 102, 296, 303
viparyāsa-viparyaya, 82, 209
vipaśyanā, 239
vipāka, 31, 241, 337, 338
vipāka-phala, 31, 120
vipula, 148
vipratipanna, 252
vipraņașța, 299
vibandha (tattvadarśana-v. timira),
§ III-4, 70, 169
vibandha-pratiședha (vaiś. 2), 120, 340
vibuddha, 68, 155
vibhava, 241
vibhava-lakṣaṇa (paripantha), 82, 214
vibhavâbhilāşin, 80, 202
vibhāga, 141
vibhu (=buddha), 329, 351
vibhutva, 319
vibhūti, 347, 356
vibhūti-rūpârtha--vidarśana, 112
vimati, 155 (~ prākāra)
vimala, 86, 114, 228
vimala-guņôpeta, 110
vimalā (bhūmi), 92, 255
vimalā buddha-guņāḥ (RG III), 23, 76
vimalâmbu, 110
vimalâśraya, 227
[ 431 ]



J. TAKASAKI
vimātratā, 365
vimukti, 94, 108, 315
(nāsti vimukter hāniḥ) (āveņ. 11), 122, 341
vimukti-kāya, 110
~ sya pūrņam, 112
vimukti-jñāna-darśana, 342
(nāsti ~ sya hānih) (även. 12), 122, 342
vimukti-phala-dānatva, 110
vimukha, 252
vimūdha, 387
vimokşa-mukha (śūnyatâdi), 52, 151, 204,
299
viyoga, 264
virāga, 70, 164
virāga-dharma, (= virāgatā) (= nirodha-
satya), III-1, 70, 165
virāga-hetu (= mārga-satya), § III-2,
70, 164
virāgitā, 70, 165
virāgin, 282
vivarta, 237, 238
vivikta, 306
vividhā, 161
viſāradatva, 338
visuddha, 228
~& samklişța, 76
viſuddha-sama-dantatva (mahāp. 18), 122,
345
viśuddhi, 86, 94, 100, 263
viśuddhi-guna-parikarman, 150
viśuddhi-gotra, 76, 152, 221
visuddhi-cittaprakſti, 28
viſuddhi-parikarma-guņa, 66, 150
viśuddhi-pārami-prāpti, 114, 327
višeşa-laksaņa, 218
viśodhya (-artha), 150
viśleșa, 315
vişaya-rati-hara, 368
visamyoga (B III), 31, 108, 110, 310, 312,
315, 337
visamyoga-phala, 31, 120
visamvāditva, 210
visara, 371
visarati, 302
vistara-vibhāga-nirdeśa, 13
visāmagrī, 241
vihāra, 172, 255
vīta, 279
vīrya, 130; (na ~tah hāniḥ, āveņ 8), 122,
340
výkşa (TG VII, for dhātu) cf. bījâökura
vịtta-ślaksaņânunnāma-bāhutā (mahāp.
11), 122, 345
vștti (= pravſtti) (TG VI), § VIII (VI);
86, 199, 229;
(B VI), § XIII-(VI), 108, 311
vşșa-pakşma-netra (mahāp. 24–2), 346
vịşabhitā, 148
vaijayanta, 356
vaidūrya-maņi (parable of), § 1-3, VIII
(IX b)-4; (s. for dhātu), 66
vaidharmya, 378
vaineyika, 192
vaipākika, 337
vaipulya, 374
vaimalya (= āsravakşaya), 227
vaimalya-dhātu, 28
vaimalya-parisuddhi, 84
vaimalya-viếuddhi, 108, 110, 315
vaimalya-śuddhi, 108
vairūdhi, 374
vaiśāradya, 66, 120, 340
vyakti, 164
vyañjana, 142, 357
[vyatirekâlarkāra), 377
vyapagata-vişama-sthāna, 358
vyavadāta-sūkşma-suvarņa-varṇa-ccha-
viḥ (mahāp. 27), 122, 346
vyavadāna-dhātu (= tathāgata-garbha)
(RG I), 24, 389
vyavadāna-satya-dvaya, 165, 184
laksaņa (virāga-dharma), 70, 74, 165
vyavasthā, 199
vyavasthāna, 285
vyavasthiti, 328
vyavahāra, 166
vyasana, 90, 249, 387
vyākaraña, 285, 305
vyākaraṇa-kathā, 187
vyādhi, 236
vyāpi; 108, 112, 114; (K III), 128, 354,
375
vyāpitva, 112, 321
vyāyata (pādatā) (mahāp. l-c), 344
vyupadeśa, 158
vyupameya, 118, 334
vyūha, 148
vyoman (s. for parama-bodhi), 124
vrata, 328
[ 432 ]



The Ratna gotravibhāga
saktatva, 130, 382
Śakti, 68, 156, 158
sakra (K 1), 124, 355
ſakra-pratibhāsavat, Š XVII-2 (I), 126
sama-prāpti, 84, 207
śamâmptapada-prāpti, 118
samaikayāna-gotra, 84, 220
sayana-sthita, 357
śaraṇa, 22, 74
ſarana-traya, § V, 68, 72, 180
saraṇatrayâbhyupapatti, 118
śarīra, 359
śarīrin, 197
śānta, 68, 114
śānta-dharmatā, 174
śānti, 360; ( āsravakşaya-jñāna-bala,
bala 10), 120, 339
śānti-patha (= nirvāņa), 27, 326
śānti-pathâvatāra(-nidana), 116
śānti-mārga, 330
śānty-anusamsa-darsaka, 132
śāli, 282
śāśvata, 74, 108, 112, 167, 257
śāśvata-dụsți, 219
śāśvata-(loka-nātha), 11
śāsana, 72, 179
śāstỊ, 72, 180, 333
śāstr-gaurava, 106, 308
śāstra-sambandha, § 1-4, 68, 154
śilpa-sthāna, 329
silpa-sthānāni kausalam, 116, 329
siva, 74, 112, 166, 167, 268, 276
sisya, 72, 181
śīla, 130
śīla-samvara, 178
śukla-dharmauşadhi, 376
śukla-pravara-damşțſatā (mahāp. 19), 122,
345
śuklâmśa, 222
śuklâspada, 130
suci, 84
suci-śīla-jighraņa, 112
śuddha-prabhā-mandala-gātratā (mahāp.
13), 122, 345
śuddha-bhūmi, 98
śuddha-bhūmi-gata (-mala), 98, 278
śuddha-sattva, 380
buddhi, 68, 164; (B I), 108, 310
śubha, 84, 114, 208
śubha-pāramitā, 82, 84, 209
śubha-dharmatā, 268
śubha-ratnatraya-sargaka (gotra), 76
śubha-samjñā, 82, 208
śubhâkāra, 70, 169
śubhâtma-sukha-nityatva (-guna-pārami.
tā) (TG III), 46, 57, 104
śūnya, 104, 301
śünyam sarvam, 54, 106
śünya & aśūnya, 54, 104, 106
sūnyatā, 104, 106, 151
śūnyatā-jñāna, 104, 209
śūnyatā-dịșți, 80
śūnyatā-vikșipta-citta (pudgala), 38, 104,
296, 303
[śünya-vāda], 54 f
saikșa, 74, 98, 183, 280
śaila-deśa-gamika, 366
sobhā, 185
śraddhā, 102
śraddhā-gamana, 143
śrāvaka (TG II-III, sattva 3), 72, 80,
82, 104
śrāvaka-naya, 74
śrāvaka-yānika, 72, 80, 90
śrāvaka-samgha, 72, 74
śruti, 130
śloka, 11-17, 155, 309
ślokârtha-samgraha-vyākhyāna, 11, 18,
309
(şaț-padârtha] (svabhāvâdi), 13, 45, 58,
200, 231, 400-408
[șaț-pāramitā] (dānâdi), § VIII (X)-3,
XVIII-1, 264
şad-āyatana-viseșa, 50
şad-indriya-vişaya, 319
S
samyojana, 244, 245
samrakṣaṇa, 390
samvara, 178
samvarta, 237
samvit, 365
samvidyamānatā, 268
samvști, 221
[ 433 ]



J. TAKASAKI
samvști-kāya, 100, 120
samvịti-kāyatā, 336
samvști-pada-sthāna, 72, 181
samvști-satya, 100, 285
samvịtta-skandhatā (mahāp. 10), 122, 345
samyślis, 244
samślişța, 250
samsāra, 90, 92, 116, 250, 291
& nirvāṇa § VIII (III-IV)-4', 84, 118
samsāra-gata, 204
samsāra-duḥkhôpaśama-mātrâbhirati, 82
samsāra-mandala, 390
samsāra-mandala-kşānti, 132
samsști, 367
samskāra, 74, 82, 183, 215
saņskāra-paripāka, 242
samskſta, 74, 156, 381
sa-karaṇīya, 74, 183
sakalam, 191
samkara-pūti-dhāna, 272
samkāra-dhāna, 272
samketa, 166
samkleśa (klesa-, karma-, janma-), 70,
82, 84, 170, 217
samkleśa-nimitta, 301
samkleśa-vyavadāna, 234
sampkṣepa-mātraka, 193
samgraha, 332
samgrāma, 360
samgha (VP 3), 66, 68, 72, 142
samgha-kära-kriyā, 72
samgha-ratna (VP 3), S IV, 22, 72
-guņa-vibhāga, 66
sacet, 221
samcintya, 244
samjñā (-viparyāsa), 230
samjñā-grāba, 76, 189, 191
samjñā-citta-dịşți-(viparyāsa), 230
sat (- dhira), 319
satata-samitam, 183
sat-kāya, 158
satkaya-dịşți, 158
satkāya-dụşți-patita (-pudgada), 104,
296, 303
satkāya-nirodha, 104, 297
sattya, 68, 235
(catur-vidha ~) (TG II, III) (→ icchan-
tika, tirthya, pratyekabuddha, śrāvaka),
78, 80
sattva-dhātu (= tathāgata-garbha), 22, 39,
143, 151;(= přthag-jana), (TGVII, IX a),
88, 231; (= sattva-rāśi), 90, 251, 286,
290, 354
--akşayatva, 118
sattva-rāśi, 22, 78, 80 (trividha), 197
sattvâtma-sama-darsikā (maitrī), 106
sattvānām dharmadhātu, 161
sattvârtha-kſt (RG IV), 23
sattvârtha-kriyā, 116
sattvârtha-nirapekṣatā, 202, 206
sattvârtha-vimukhatā, 80, 206
sat-puruṣa, 223
satya (= āryasatya), 340
saddharma, 126, 245
saddharma-kāya (=dharmakāya), 358
saddharma-rasa-danatā, 110
saddharma-vyasanâvịtâtmaka, 132
saddharma-samgraha, 118
saddharma-salila, 364
sadma, 323
samtāna, 365
samtāraṇa, 254
samdịśyate, 265
san-nātha, 275
samnāba, 248
samniḥśraya, 244
sapta-bhūmi-gata (-mala), 100
sapta-sapti, 370
saptârtha-pada (=vajra-padāni sapta), 132
saptôtsada-śarīratā (mahāp. 5), 122, 344
sabhaya, 72, 181, 182,
samatā, 82
samanupaśyati, 301
samanta-bhadrâpratima (-ātma-bhāva)
(mahāp. 32), 122, 346
samanvāgata, 167
samanvāgama (= yoga), 86, 145, 227, 313
sama-prekşin, 106
samalā tathatā (RG I) (VP 4), § VII-XI,
23, 74, 78, 187
samavadhāna, 223, 245
samavasaraņa, 226
sama-vimukti, 267
samā catvārimsad-daśanatā (mahāp. 16),
122, 345
samādāya, 356
samādhāna, 118
samādhi, 80, 86, 200
[ 434 ]



The Ratnagotra vibhāga
sarva-dharmadhātu, 192
sarva-dhātu (=sarva-loka), 368
sarva-sattva, 124, 197, 352
sarva-sattvârthakệt, 68
sarvasattvās tathāgatagarbhāḥ, 78
sarvâkāra, 94, 262
sarvâkara-guņôpeta-śūnyatā, 94
sarvâvabodhitā, 114
sarve dehinaḥ (= sarva-sattvāḥ), (sarva-
śarīriņaḥ), 197
salila-bandhana, 298
sa-vāsana-malôddhști, 92
sasya, 364
samādhi-bhāvanā (TG II, hetu 3), 80, 82,
206
samādhi-samsparśa-sukhânubhūti, 112
samāna, 248
samāpatti (-āvaraņa), 326
samārūdha, 177
samāropa, 302
samāvartana, 148
samāhịtôdyamaḥ, 325
samudāgama, 260
samudānīta (-gotra), 30, 102, 288
samudra, 265
samặddhi, 201
sametya, 372
sampatti, 118, 332
sampatti-yogaſtva), 118
sambaddha, 226, 292
sambandha, 86, 154
sambuddha (= tathāgata) (TG VIe), 86
sambuddhata, 172
sambodhi, 116, 330
sambhava, 198
sambhava-lakşaņa (paripantha), 82, 214
sambhāra (punya- & jñāna-), 124, 352, 382
sambhști (=sambhāra), 32 (~-dvaya)
sambhedataḥ, 342
sambhoga-kāya, 102
sammiñjita, 270
samyaktva-niyataḥ sattva-rāśiḥ, 80, 205
samyaktva-niyāma, 204
samyak-pratipatti, 252
samyak-pratipanna, 252
samyak-sambuddha-dharmatva, 124, 353
samyag-aviparyasta, 86, 230
sarva, 263
sarvagatva (= sarvatraga), 199
sarva-cittârambaņa, 194
sarva-jña, 186
sarvajña-jñāna, 266
sarvajña-jñāna-gocara, 112
sarvajñatā, 114
sarvajña-dharmatā, 175
sarvatra, 76
sarvatraga (TG VIII), § VIII (VIII), 88,
175, 199, 233
sarvathā érthakặt, 130
sarva-darsin (= sarvajña), 76, 186
sarvadarbiņām viņayaḥ (gotra), 76
sarva-dharmabhisambodhi (vais. 1), 120, 340
sahaja, 24 (-avinirbhāgatā).
sahasra-koți-niyuta, 270
sākşātykļ, 302
sāņketikam vapuḥ (=samvști-kāya), 120,
337
sângana (bodhisattva), 68, 161
sādharmya, 200
sādhumati (bhūmi), 94
sāmtānika, 279
sāmnidhya, 266, 268
sāmagrī, 237
sāmānya-lakṣaṇa, 218
sāmbhoga, 289
sāmbhogika (kāya) XIII (VIb), 29, 102,
114, 116, 324
sāra, 21, 348; (TG 3 s. for dhātu), 96, 269
sārârtha, 282
sārârtha-darśana, 98
sârtha, 331
sârtha-bīja, 130, 378
sâsrava-karman, 82, 216
sâsrava-dharma, 104
sāhasra-lokadhātu, 190
simha (s. for G II), 120
simhavat, § XV (II), 122
simha-pūrvârdha-kāyatā (mahāp. 8), 122,
344
(siddhānta-naya & deśanā-naya], 285
sītâmalôrņôdita-cāru-vaktra (mahāp. 25),
122, 346
sukathā-suci-śrava, 112
sukha, 84
sukhatva, 124
sukha-pāramitā, 82, 84, 209
sukha-samjñā, 82, 208
sukha-sampatti, 118, 333
[ 435 ]



J. TAKASAKI
sugata (=buddha) (TG I, s. for dhātu), 318
su-daiśika, 376
su-parikarma-kſta-cetas, 252
su-pratișthita (-pādatā), 344
su-pratişghita-cakrankra-vyāyatôtsanga-
pādatā (mahāp. 1), 122, 344
sumeru, 190
sura-pati, 358
suvarna (TG 4, s. for dhātu, tathatā), 96,
100
suvarna-bimba, 224
su-viếuddha, 72; (-avasthā) (TG IX c), §
VIII (IX c), 88, 92, 231
su-sāra, 269
sūksma, 100, 285
sūkşma-vastra, 151
sūkşma-nimitta-prapañca, 216
sūtikā-sadma-stbita, 323
sūtra (~, geya, etc.), 100, 285
sūtra-sthāniya (-śloka), 13, 356
surya (K V), 128
sūryavat, § XVII-2 (V), 128
sțjat, 367
sevana, 120
sevya (-viddhi) (mārga), 120, 367
saukṣmya, 112
skandha, 238
skandha-dhātv-indriya, 88, 236
skandhâyatana-dhātavaḥ, 236
skhalita (nāsti
m, āveņ. 1), 120, 341
stuti-ninda, 185
sthāna, 21, 142
sthānâsthāna (-jñāna-bala) (bala 1), 120, 338
sthiti, 147
sthira (-stha), 120, 341
sthairyatya, 124
snigdha-bhāva (-svabhāva) (TG c), 78, 201
sparsitavya, 126, 367
spharaña (of arka), 94
smrti (nästi em teh hãnth, aven. 9), 120,
341
sva-karman, 126
syakarmôdbhava, 360
sva-citta, 126
svaccha-jala-bhājana, 130
svacchâvirala-dantatā (mahāp. 17), 122, 345
svadharmatā, 161
sya-parârtha (B IV), 108, 310
svaparârtha-sampatti (B IV), 29, 108
svabhāva (TG I), § VIII (I-II)-1, IX-4
(trividdha-); (B I), § XIII (I-II)
svabhāva-kāya (= svābhāvika), 102
svabhāva-gāmbhirya-nayâvabodhana, 112
svabhāvâparinişpatti, 108, 315
svayam, 157
svayam-bhū (= buddha), 282, 296; (= pra-
tyeka-buddha), 202
svarasa-yogena, 240
svarasa-vāhin, 264
svarga, 381
sva-lakşaņa, 146
sva-samtāna, 178
svasamtānâvabhāsa, 72
sva-stha (G II), 120, 341, 349
svābhāvika (kāya), § XIII (VI a), 29,
102, 114, 289, 324
svârtha-sampatti, 108, 112
svârthasampatty-adhişthāna, 120
svârtha-sampad, 68, 156, 162
H
hata-satkāyasāra, 283
hāni-kāraņa-kſti, 120, 340
hitatya, 126
hīna (= hīna-yāna), 388
hina-pranīta-dharma, 267
hina(yāna)ruci, 132
binasattveşv avajñā, 106, 305
hetu, 21, 124, 128, 241; (TG, II), S VIII (I. -
II), 78, 199; (B II), § XIII (I-II), 108,
311; (= gotra, dhātu), 21, 102, 225, 290
~ & pratyaya, § VI-2, 25, 76, 195
hetu-lakṣaṇa (paripantha), 82, 214
hetu-samanvāgama (TG V), 86, 226
hety-ānantya (-tva), 118, 332
hema-bimba (+ kanaka--bimba), 102
hema-mandalaka (+ suvarna)
heya (-vastu) (→ duḥkha-samudaya), 120,
124
[ 436 ]



INDEX OF WORKS, AUTHORS & SCHOOLS
(Those with the mark
are the titles restored from C)
Abhidharma Buddhism, 28, 34, 59
Abhidharmakośa (Kārikā) (AK), 21
(Vyākhyā of Yaśomitra), 285
Abhidharmasamuccaya (AS), 406, 407;
(Vyākhyā), 406
Abhisamayâlankāra (AA), 15, 62, 177, 300,
343
Abhisamayâlankārâloka (AAA), 171
Adbhuta-sūtra (Adbhuta-dharmaparyāya),
49
Advaita Vedānta (School), 61
Akşayamati-pařiprcchā (AkşP), 34, 142, 260
Amitāyus Buddha, 53, 390
Amộtākara, 254
Arguttara-nikāya (AN), 34, 157, 240
Anūnatvâpūrņatvanirdesa-parivarta (AAN)
32, 39, 45, 51, 62, 144, 166, 203, 228,
232, 234, 258, 261, 268
* Anuttarâśraya-sūtra (AĀS), 45, 48, 49–
52, 167, 173, 186, 187, 188, 189, 192,
193, 194, 200, 204, 208, 209, 210, 213,
214, 218, 230, 232, 233, 234, 241, 260,
308, 310, 311, 312, 315, 318, 320, 322,
324, 327, 329, 331, 334, 336, 338, 339,
341, 343, 351, 408
(Ārya)candrottaradārikā-sūtra, 54
Aryadeva, 61
Arya-śrīmālā-sūtra → śrīmāla-sūtra
Asanga (Slob-dpon Thogs-med), 7, 44,
52, 61
Aşțasāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitāsūtra (ASP),
33, 171
Ašvaghoșa, 53
Avatamsaka-sutra (Tathāgatôtpattisam-
bhavanirdeśa-parivarta) (Avats), 33,
35-36, 59, 175, 189, 223, 269, 290, 354
Bhagavadgītā, 61, 235
Blo-ldan ses-rab, 6
Blue Annals (Deb-ther shon-po), 7
Bodhicaryâvatāra-pañjikā, 385
Bodhiruci, 7, 8, 9
Bodhisattvabhūmi (BBh), 21, 44, 173, 260,
288, 300, 302
Buddhabhūmisūtra (BBS), 404
* Buddhagotraśāstra (BGÁ), 37, 45, 46–49,
52, 164 ff., 170, 173, 176, 185, 198, 200,
201, 204, 206, 208, 210, 212, 213, 214,
218, 219, 221, 223, 225, 230, 233, 234,
258, 259, 260, 263, 264, 277–280, 281,
283, 285, 286, 287, 289, 290, 292, 295,
296, 300, 305-9, 324, 327, 329, 331,
332, 333, 334, 382, 408
Bịhadāraṇyakôpanişad (Bșhad. Up), 28
Catuḥśubha (of Nāgārjuna), 254
Chien-Hui (= Sāramati), 9
Chiu-ching-yi-ch'eng-pao-sing-lun, 7
Daśabhūmikasūtra (DBS), 35, 51, 150, 213
Daśabhūmikasūtra-śāstra, 8
Devaprajña, 9
Dhammapadâtthakathā, 34
Dhāraṇīśvararāja-sūtra (DRS), 32, 51, 146-
153, 188, 192, 193, 338, 339, 341
Dharmadharmatāvibhāga (DDV), 44
* Dharmadhātvavišeșaśāstra (→Mahāyā-
na-dharmadhātvavićeşaśāstra)
Dharmarakşa, 35
Dțdhâdhyāśaya-parivarta (DşdhP), 33, 143
Fa-hsian (School), 8
Fa-tsang, 9
Gaganagañjā-sūtra (Gaganagañjābodhisat.
tvaparivarta) (GagS), 33, 224, 239
Gaudapāda, 61, 167, 189
Gser-phren (of Tson-kha-pa), 21
Guņabhadra, 144
Hüa-yen (School), 8
Hsūang-chuang, 8, 57
Jain,
203
Jñānagupta, 155
[ 437 ]



J. TAKASAKI
285,
Jñānâlokâlankāra-sūtra (JAA), 16, 17, 32,
36, 50, 159-160, 167, 260, 287, 322,
356, 359, 364, 368, 369, 372, 373, 374
Ju-lai-hsing-hsien-ching, 35
Kai-yuan-che-chiao-mo-lu, 7
Kaņişka, 53
Kāśyapa-parivarta (KāśP), 33, 51, 204
Lakşaņânusāra-śāstra, 34
Lankāvatāra-sūtra (Lank), 31, 44, 45, 53,
59, 60, 61, 150, 163, 189, 204, 214,
295
Li-t’ai-san-pao-chi, 8
Madhyamaka-kārikā (MK), 163, 232, 305
Mādhyamika, 60
Madhyântavibhāga (MAV), 44
bhāşya (of Sthiramati), 41, 300
Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra (Mahāyāna) (MPS),
33, 39-40, 223, 224, 262, 272, 298, 304
[Mahā]prajñāpāramitā (-upadeśa]-śāstra,
15, 240, 343
Mahasanghātasüstra (Mahāsamnipātasutra),
34, 146
Mahāsangika, 34
Mahāyānâbhidharma-sūtra (Abhidhs), 33,
58, 290
*Mahāyāna-dharmadhātv-avišeşa-śāstra
(DAS), 9, 45–46, 62, 200, 207, 225, 227,
228, 231, 236, 257, 267, 301, 316, 408
Mahāyānasamgraga (MS), 44, 52, 290, 405;
(Bhāşya), 10, 52, 382;
(Parmārtha's translation) (MSbh(P)), 11,
52, 249, 264, 285, 286, 291, 292, 293,
382, 384, 389
*Mahāyānaśraddhotpäda (-śāstra), 45, 53,
60, 300, 390
Mahāyānasūtrâlankāra (MSA), 13, 33, 41-
44, 163, 200, 206, 211-12, 286, 288, 289,
315, 402
Mabâyāna-uttaratantra-śāstra, 5
Mabāyānôttaratantraśāstropadeśa, 7
Mahāvibhāṣāśāstra, 34, 240
Maitreya (Hphags-pa Mgon-po byams-pa),
7, 40, 62
Majjhima-nikāya (MN), 158, 182, 301
Manusmrti, 209
Milindapañhā, 34
Mundakôpanişad (Mund. Up.), 28
Nāmasamgiti, 300
Nāgārjuna, 15, 33, 57, 61, 240, 300
Pao-chung-lu, 8
Paramārtha, 10, 47, 52, 53, 60
Phar-phyin skabs brgyad-pa, 21
Prajñāpāramitā-sūtra (PP), 33, 54, 59,
171, 305
Prasannapadā, 232
Pratītyasamutpādahşdaya-kārikā (of Nā-
gārjuna), 300
Rāșțrapāla-pariprcchā, 192, 214
Ratnacūda-paripịcchā (RCP), 19, 33,
251, 263
Ratnadārikāsūtra (Ratnasūtra) (RDS), 14 f,
32, 338, 339, 341, 343, 347
Ratnagotraśāstra, 5
Ratnagotravibhāga, 5
Ratnakūța-sūtra, 33, 144, 204, 251
Ratnamati, 7, 8, 9
Ratnavajra, 6
Şadāyatana[rāśi) sūtra (Şads) 33, 50, 260
Saddharmapundarikasūtra (SPS), 33, 56,
186
Sāgaramati-paripěcchā (SāgP), 33, 51, 245
Sajjana, 6, 7
Saka fragments (of Ratnagotravibhāga), 5
Samkhya (School), 203
Samyutta-nikāya (SN), 34, 232, 277, 291,
294
Sandhinirmocana-sūtra, 48, 57, 173, 295
Sankara, 61
Sanghabhadra, 159
Sāramati, 9, 46, 56
Śāriputrâbhidharma-śāstra, 34, 240
Sarvāstivāda, 34
Saundarananda-kāvya, 300
Śikṣānanda, 54, 145
śrīmālā [devī-simhanāda]sūtra (ŚMS), 22,
32, 37-39, 45, 48, 51, 144, 155, 167,
174, 182, 183, 185, 188, 209, 215, 216,
217, 218, 219, 235, 242, 250, 259, 261,
262, 265, 267, 291, 292, 293, 296, 301,
302, 303, 312, 323
Sthirâdhyāśaya-parivarta (= Dşdhâdhyā-
śaya-parivarta), 143
śuklavidarśanā, 300
Sumangala-visāraṇī, 300
Ta-ch'ang-fa-chieh-wu-ch’a-pieh-lun-chu
(of Fa-tsang), 9
Ta-t'ang-nei-tien-lu, 8
Tathāgatagarbha-sūtra (TGS), 32, 35,
[ 438 ]



The Rat na gotra vibhāga
36-37, 39, 47, 162, 196, 268,276, 281,
294
Tathāgataguņajñānâcintyavişayâvatāra-
sūtra (Acints), 33, 36, 145
Tathāgatamabākaruņā-sūtra, 147
Tathāgatôtpattisambhava-nirdeśa, 35, 51,
189, 269
Ti-lun School, 8
Tson-kha-pa, 21
Upanishad, 28, 61
Uttaratantra, 5, 54
Vaiseșika, 203
Vaibhāșika, 34
Vajracchedikā-sūtra (Vaj C), 33, 322
Vasubandhu, 8, 40, 47, 49, 52, 53, 61,
62, 405
Vātsīputrīya, 34, 203, 240
Vedānta Philospphy, 20
Vedāntavāda, 28, 38, 61
Vibhajyavādin, 240
Vijñānavāda, 28, 33, 40, 49, 52, 57–61,
406
Vijñaptimātratā-triņšikā (VMT), 44, 290,
382
Vimalakirtinirdeśa (VimN), 277
Yogācāra (School), 407
Yogācārabhūmi (YB), 13, 21, 40, 44, 48,
200, 230, 404
[ 439 ]



PRINTED IN ROME
BY
AZIENDE TIPOGRAFICHE EREDI DOTT. G. BARDI
SALITA DE CRESCENZI, 16
1966



XXI.
XXII.
XXIII.
XXIV.
XXV.
XXVI.
Un Editto bilingue greco-aramaico di Asoka. La prima iscrizione greca sco-
perta in Afghanistan. Testo, traduzione e note a cura di G. PUGLIESE-
CARRATELLI e di G. LEVI DELLA VIDA, con prefazione di G. Tucci e in-
troduzione di U. SCERRATO (out of print).
LEE P. H., Studies in the Saenaennorae: old Korean poetry.
GNOLI R., The Pramāņavārttikam of Dharmakirti. The first chapter with
the autocommentary. Text and critical notes.
Tuccs G., Deb t'er dmar po, Tibetan Chronicles. Text and English
translation (with original text) (in the press].
WYLIE T. V., The Geography of Tibet according to the •Dzam-gling-
rgyas-bshad.
CONZE E., The Gilgit manuscript of the Astādaśasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā.
Chapters 55 to 70 corresponding to the 5th Abhisamaya. Text and English
translation.
GNOLI R., Udbhața's Commentary on the Kāvyālamkāra of Bhāmaha.
Sanskrit fragments from Pakistan. Edited with critical notes.
ROCK J. F., A Na-khi-English Encyclopedic Dictionary, Part I.
A bilingual Graeco-Aramaic Edict of Asoka, Text, Translation and Notes
by G. PUGLIESE-CARRATELLI and G, GARBINI, Foreword by G. Tucci,
Introduction by U, SCERRATO.
GNOLI G., Le iscrizioni Giudeo-Persiane del Ġūr (Afghanistan). Text,
Italian Translation and Notes.
AUBOYER J., Introduction à l'étude de l'art de l'Inde.
SCARCIA G., Şifat-nama-yi Darviš Muḥammad Hān-i Gāzi. A Muslim
Crusade against the Kafirs of Laġmān in A. D. 1582.
TAKASAKI J., A study on the Ratnagotravibhāga (Uttaratantra) Being a
Treatise on the Tatbāgatagarbha Theory of Mahāyāna Buddhism.
XXVII.
XXVIII.
XXIX.
XXX.
XXXI.
XXXII.
XXXIII.
Special series:
Oriente Poliano. Studies and lectures delivered at Is.M.E.O. on the occasion
of the 7th Centenary of the birth of Marco Polo (1254–1954), by E. BALAZS,
P. DEMIÉVILLE, K. ENOKI, L. CARRINGTON GOODRICH, E. HAENISCH, L. HAM-
BIS, A. MOSTAERT, L. OLSCHKI, A. NILAKANTA SHASTRI, E. H. SCHAFER,
B. SPULER, R. WITTKOWER.
Forthcoming Works:
Tucci G., Deb t'er dmar po, Tibetan Chronicles. Text and English translation (with
original text).
Rock J. F., Na-khi Culture as expressed in their literature: an encyclopedic Dictionary.
Part II.
RUEGG D. S., The life of Eu Ston Rin Po Che.
Orientalia Romanu. 2, Essays and Lectures, by V, S. Agrawala, P. Beonio-Brocchieri,
P. Corradini, L, Lanciotti.
Works in course of preparation:
PENSA C., - Vimuktisena's Abhisamayālankāravyākhyā. Sanskrit Text.
Tucci G. GARGANO A., The Abhidharmasamuccayakārikā by Sanghatrāla, text and
commentary of a hitherto unknown work, the Sanskrit manuscript of which
has been found in Tibet.
TUCCI G. - PETECH L., Grub-m'ta-šel-gyi-me-lon (Crystal mirror of the philosophical
and religious systems), translated from the Tibetan.
Tucci G. PETECH L., The Fifth Dalai-Lama's Chronicle of Tibet, translated from
the Tibetan.



PREZZO L. 16.000
